# 前  言

*Computing Fundamentals with C++, 3rd Edition* is written for students in a first course in a Computer Science curriculum using the C++ programming language. It is appropriate for students with no programming experience as well as those with programming experience in another language.

*Computing Fundamentals with C++, 3rd Edition* emphasizes computing fundamentals while recognizing the relevance and validity of object-oriented programming. This book is the result of decades of reasoning about how best to facilitate student learning in the first course of the computer science curriculum, how best to integrate objects and classes into it, and how best to prepare students for the next course.

## FEATURES

**Book Resources.** Much of the C++ code from this textbook and chapter outlines written as presentations can be found at https://www2.cs.arizona.edu/people/mercer/compfun3/.

**Traditional Topics.** This textbook recognizes the relevance and validity of object-oriented programming while emphasizing traditional computing fundamentals. It also presents some C++ features that could well become traditional topics, such as templates for generic classes and standard containers with iterators, during the fi rst two courses.

**Standard C++.** Because the International Standards Organization (ISO) approved the C++ standard document many years ago, students can now study C++ as a language that has an internationally accepted standard. At the time of this writing, not all compilers were completely C++14 compliant. Because of this and the fact that C++14 only added a few things that are beyond the scope of this text book, this textbook only  uses elements up through C++11. However, because any newer release would be backwards compatible, you may certainly use C++14 compliant compiler or any newer release.

**Gentle Objects-Early Approach.** Th is third edition maintains the objects-early approach of the fi rst and second editions. Students begin by using existing objects such as string, cin, cout, BankAccount, and Grid for Karel-like (Rich Pattis) programming while honing problem-solving and program-development skills. Students will then modify, enhance, and ultimately design and implement their own classes of increasing complexity.

**Carefully Chosen Subset of Analysis, Design, and C++.** Because students using this textbook might have little or no programming or design experience, several C++ features and subtleties are not presented. Students concentrate on a solid subset of this feature-rich language. Some trickier topics are delayed until the later chapters. For example, nested loops with vectors of vectors, pointers, dynamic memory management, and the singly linked data structure are in the final two chapters. Advanced topics such as copy constructors, destructors, and operator overloading have been removed from this third edition.

**Not Tied to a Specifi c System.** Th ere is no bias toward a particular operating system or compiler. Th is textbook presents standard \#includes and namespaces according to the ISO standard. All material applies to any computer system using standard C++. All code has been tested with Microsoft Visual C++ on Windows, and GNU g++ on Unix.

**Algorithmic Patterns.** Algorithmic patterns help beginning  programmers design algorithms around a set of common algorithm generalities. Th e fi rst algorithmic pattern, and perhaps one of the oldest—Input/Process/Output (IPO)—is introduced in Chapter 1. It is reused in subsequent chapters. Th e IPO pattern is especially useful to students with no programming experience and to the lab assistants helping them. Other algorithmic patterns introduced in the appropriate places include Alternative Action and Indeterminate Loop.

**Extensively Tested in the Classroom and Lab.** This textbook was six years in the making. Students supplied many useful comments and suggestions concerning manuscript clarity, organization, projects, and examples. Th e tremendous personal contact and testability was made possible with closed lab sections for all students.

## PEDAGOGY

This textbook has many pedagogical features that make this introduction to programming, design, and object technology accessible to students.

**Self-Check Questions.** Th ese short questions and answers allow students to evaluate whether they understand the details and terms presented in the reading. Th e answers to all self-check questions are included at the end of this textbook.

**Exercises.** Th ese transitional problems examine the major concepts presented in the chapter. Answers are available only to instructors to encourage students to write down the answers with paper and pencil, as if they were practice test questions.

**Programming Tips.** Each set of weekly programming projects is  preceded by a set of programming tips intended to help students complete programs while warning of potential pitfalls, and promoting good programming habits.

**Programming Projects.** Many relatively small-scale problems have been extensively lab tested to ensure that projects can be assigned and completed with little or no instructor intervention. The programming projects are strategically positioned to occur every week of lecture to reinforce the concepts just presented.

## WHAT’S NEW IN THIS THIRD EDITION?

This third edition contains dramatic improvements in programming projects, making them more interesting and challenging. Included are projects I have developed and class-tested at the University of Arizona,and, in fact, students have rated these “outside” assignments very highly. Th is third edition is smaller. We removed chapters on inheritance, object-oriented programming and design, operator overloading, and recursion. Adopters weren’t using these chapters and  we felt the second edition was too big at 830 pages. The topics in  this edition refl ect everything used in a traditional CS1 course while adding a few topics from CS2, such as generic collections with templates.

This third edition has been updated to make sure everything works using the current standard, C++14. Th is edition also incorporates a few appropriate additions to C++, such as the longoverdue literal nullptr. Most of the major additions to the C++ programming language, such as threads, are beyond the scope of this textbook.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Critical feedback from students and other instructors is essential to creating a solid textbook. For the fi rst and second editions, I was fortunate enough to have small lecture sizes (20 to 35 students) and to be in all labs with all of my students for 10 years. Th is enabled me to keep track of their progress and of their problems, which has dramatically helped produce a textbook that is accessible to the intended audience. I acknowledge and thank those Penn State students.

I have been fortunate to encounter many excellent educators and industry people who care and think about the same issues. Th e debates and new ideas generated in discussions, both live and by email, have allowed me to make the plethora of informed decisions necessary for producing a high-quality textbook. I wish to acknowledge the following people (listed in reverse alphabetical order) with apologies to those whom I have unintentionally left out: Gene Wallingford, Doug Van Weiren, David Teague, Marty Stepp, Dave Richards, Stuart Reges, Margaret Reek,Ken Reek, Rich Pattis, Allison Obourn, Linda Northrop, Zung Nguyen, John McCormick, Carolina McCluskey, Lester McCann, Mary Lynn Manns, Mike Lutz, David Levine, Patrick Homer, Jim Heliotis, Peter Grogono, Adele Goldberg, Michael Feldman, Ed Epp, Robert Duvall (the lecturer from Duke, not the actor), Ward Cunningham, Alistair Cockburn, Mike Clancy, Tim Budd, Barbara Boucher-Owens, Mike Berman, Joe Bergin, Owen Astrachan, and Erzebet Angster.

Though too numerous to mention, I also acknowledge the many authors and presenters who have infl uenced me during my thirty-year career. In addition, my thanks go to the people at Franklin, Beedle & Associates: the late Jim Leisy, Jaron Ayres, Brenda Jones, and Tom Sumner.

## REVIEWERS

Reviewers spend many hours poring over material with critical eyes and useful comments. Because of the high quality of their work, criticisms and recommendations were always considered seriously. I thank the reviewers of this and previous editions.

|                    |                                              |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Kristin Roberts    |  *Grand Rapids Community College*            |
| Rich Pattis        |  *UC Irvine*                                 |
| Michael Berman     |  *Rowan University*                          |
| Seth Bergman       |  *Rowan University*                          |
| Robert Duvall      |  *Duke University*                           |
| Tom Bricker        |  *University of Wisconsin, Madison*          |
| David Teague       |  *Western Carolina University*               |
| Ed Epp             |  *University of Portland*                    |
| James Murphy       |  *California State University, Chico*        |
| Jerry Weltman      |  *Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge*   |
| John Miller        |  *St. John’s University*                     |
| Stephen Leach      |  *Florida State University*                  |
| Alva Th ompson     |  *University of South Florida*               |
| Norman Jacobson    |  *University of California, Irvine*          |
| David Levine       |  *Gettysburg College*                        |
| H. E. Dunsmore     |  *Purdue University*                         |
| Howard Pyron       |  *University of Missouri at Rolla*           |
| Lee Cornell        |  *Mankato State University*                  |
| Eugene Wallingford |  *University of Northern Iowa*               |
| David Teague       |  *Western Carolina University*               |
| Clayton Lewis      |  *University of Colorado*                    |
| Tim Budd           |  *Oregon State University*                   |
| Jim Miller         |  *University of Kansas*                      |
| Art Farley         |  *University of Oregon*                      |
| Richard Enbody     |  *Michigan State University*                 |
| Van Howbert        |  *Colorado State University*                 |
| Joe Burgin         |  *Texas Tech University*                     |
| Jim Coplien        |  *Bell Labs*                                 |
| Dick Weide         |  *Ohio State University*                     |
| Gene Norris        |  *George Mason University*                   |

## SPECIAL THANKS

I would like to thank super-reviewer Kristin Roberts from Grand Rapids Community College. Not only did she provide tremendous feedback, Kristin encouraged me to complete this third edition. Th ere have been several major changes, some reorganization of chapters, many refinements, some updates, and many new programming projects. This textbook is now current, in large part because of Kristin.
