# 第3章 自由函数的运用

**前章回顾**

You should have now gained hands-on experience with your system, the syntax of the language, error messages, and program development—from beginning to end. Most programming projects in the early chapters of this textbook are instances of the IPO algorithmic pattern. You should now be able to put these three steps in the proper order and understand the ramifications of omitting one or mixing up the order.

经过之前的学习，我们现在对自己的系统、这门语言的语法、报错信息及其程序开发，所有的这一切从头到尾都应该已经有了一个直观认知了。另外，本书之前章节中的大部分编程项目实施的都是IPO这个算法模式，相信读者现在应该可以在实践中按照正常的顺序安排这三个步骤，并能理解省略其中某个步骤或以某种混合顺序执行的情况了。

**本章提要**

Software developers often use existing software, a practice that saves time and money. Th is chapter introduces one way to reuse existing software. Programmers begin with a substantial base of tested software. You will learn how to use existing functions by reading function headings and to determine what the functions do by reading their pre- and postconditions—the contracts for using those functions. The chapter ends with a review of the categories of errors you will probably have encountered. After studying this chapter, you will be able to

- evaluate some mathematical and trigonometric functions
- use arguments in function calls
- appreciate why programmers divide software into functions
- read function headings so you can use existing functions

## 3.1 cmath FUNCTIONS

C++ defines a large collection of mathematical and trigonometric functions that may be used with doubles. Here are two:

> sqrt(x) // Return the square root of x pow(x,y) // Return x to the yth
> power
>
> Th ese functions are *called* by specifying the name of the function,
> followed by the appropriate number and type of *arguments* within the
> parentheses. Here is one general form to call certain functions.
>
> 55

General Form 3.1 *Function call*

> function-name(*arguments*)
>
> Th e *function-name* is a previously declared identifi er representing
> a function name. Th e *arguments* represent a set of zero or more
> expressions separated by commas. In the following function call, the
> function name is sqrt (square root) and the argument is 81.0:
>
> sqrt(81.0) // An example of a function call
>
> Functions may have zero, one, or even more arguments. Although most
> math functions require exactly one argument, the pow function requires
> exactly two arguments. In the following function call, the function
> name is pow (for power), the arguments are base and power, and the
> function call pow(base, power) is replaced with base^power^:
>
> double base = 2.0; double power = 3.0; cout &lt;&lt; pow(base, power);
> // Output: 8.0
>
> Any argument used in a function call must be an expression from an
> acceptable class. For example, the function call sqrt("Bobbie")
> results in an error because the argument is not one of the numeric
> classes.
>
> Th e function must also be supplied with reasonable arguments. For
> example, the function call sqrt(-4.0) could be a problem because -4.0
> is not in the domain of sqrt. Th e square root function is not defi
> ned for negative numeric values. Th e sqrt function operates correctly
> only if certain conditions are met. For sqrt, the argument must be
> greater than or equal to 0.0. Here are some mathematical and
> trigonometric functions available when you include the cmath function
> library.
>
> **A Partial List of** cmath **Functions.** *Note:* double *before the
> function name is the return type*

  **Function **                      **What it Returns **   **Example Call **   **Result**
  ---------------------------------- ---------------------- ------------------- ------------
  double ceil(double x)              Smallest integer ≥ x   ceil(2.1)           3.0
  double cos(double x)               Cosine of x radians    cos(1.0)            0.5403
  double fabs(double x)              Absolute value of x    fabs(-1.5)          1.5
  double oor(double x)               Largest integer ≤ x    oor(2.9)            2.0
  double pow(double x,               x^y^                   pow(2, 4)           16.0
  > double y) double sin(double x)   Sine of x radians      sin(1.0)            0.84147
  double sqrt(double x)              Square root of x       sqrt(4.0)           2.0

3.2: Problem Solving with cmath Functions

> With \#include &lt;cmath&gt; at the “top” of the program near
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt;, the programmer can successfully compile a
> program with calls to the functions declared in cmath. Th is means
> that the following program compiles successfully:
>
> // Show some mathematical functions available from cmath
>
> \#include &lt;cmath&gt; // For fabs, ceil, oor, and pow
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; // For cout using namespace std;
>
> int main() { double x = -2.1;
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "fabs(-2.1): " &lt;&lt; fabs(x) &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt;
> "ceil(-2.1): " &lt;&lt; ceil(x) &lt;&lt; endl
>
> &lt;&lt; " oor(-2.1): " &lt;&lt; oor(x) &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt;
> "pow(-2.1, 2.0): " &lt;&lt; pow(x, 2.0) &lt;&lt; endl; return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> fabs(-2.1): 2.1 ceil(-2.1): -2 oor(-2.1): -3 pow(-2.1, 2.0): 4.41
>
> It should be noted that integer expressions may also be used as
> arguments to cmath functions. As with assignment, the integer value
> will be promoted to a double. So sqrt(4) returns the same result as
> sqrt(4.0) without error.

SELF-CHECK

3-1 Evaluate pow(4.0, 3.0)

3-2 Evaluate pow(3.0, 4.0)

3-3 Evaluate oor(1.6 + 0.5)

3-4 Evaluate ceil(1.6 - 0.5)

3-5 Evaluate fabs(1.6 - 2.6)

3-6 Evaluate sqrt(16.0)

3.2 PROBLEM SOLVING WITH cmath FUNCTIONS

> *Problem:* Write a program that rounds a number to a specifi c number
> of decimal places. For example, 3.4589 rounded to two decimal places
> should be 3.46 and 3.4589 rounded to one decimal place should be 3.5.

3.2.1 ANALYSIS

> Th e analysis/design/implementation software development strategy
> begins with these analysis activities:

1.  Read and understand the problem.

2.  Decide what object(s) represent the answer—the output.

3.  Decide what object(s) the user must enter to get the
    > answer—the input.

4.  Write test cases (two were given above).

3.2.2 DESIGN

> Th e deliverable from this design phase is the algorithm. A pseudocode
> algorithm can be developed with the help of the Input/Process/Output
> pattern. Th at pattern is repeated here for your convenience:

**Pattern:** Input/Process/Output (IPO)

> **Problem:** Th e program requires input from the user in order to
> compute and display the desired information.

**Outline:** 1. Obtain the input data.

2.  Process the data in some meaningful way.

3.  Output the results.

**Example:** See the problem of rounding x to n decimals that follows.

> Th e Input/Process/Output pattern helps guide placement of the
> appropriate activities in the proper order. Th e algorithm represents
> the general design—an outline of the solution. Adding two usages of
> the Prompt then Input pattern and a more detailed algorithm might now
> look like this:

1.  Prompt for the number to round (call it x).

2.  Input x.

3.  Prompt for the number of decimal places (call it n).

4.  Input n.

5.  Round x to n decimals.

6.  Display the modifi ed state of x.

> Steps 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 have straightforward C++ implementations. Th
> ey can be implemented as input and/or output statements. However, the
> details of step 5, “Round x to n decimals,” are not present. Step 5
> needs refi nement. With the rest of the problem out of the way, you
> can focus on the more diffi cult process of rounding x to n decimals.
> A solution is a bit tricky, so one method is provided.

3.2: Problem Solving with cmath Functions

> To round a number x to n decimal places, fi rst multiply x by 10^n^.
> Th en add 0.5 to the new state of x. Th en store oor(x) in x. Finally,
> divide x by 10^n^. Th e refi ned algorithm adds this fourstep refi
> nement:

1.  Prompt for x, the number to round.

2.  Input x.

3.  Prompt for n, which is the number of decimal places.

4.  Input n.

5.  Round x to n decimals like this:

    a.  Let x become x \* 10^n^.

    b.  Add 0.5 to x.

    c.  Let x become oor(x).

    d.  Let x become x divided by 10^n^.

6.  Display the modifi ed state of x.

Th e following trace of program execution simulates what will happen to
x when it starts at

  -----------------------------------------------------------
  3.4567 and is rounded to two decimal places.   
                                                 
  > **Round 3.4567 to Two Decimal Places**       
  ---------------------------------------------- ------------
  > x = x \* 10^n^ = 3.4567 \* 10^2^             = 345.67

  > x = x + 0.5 = 345.67 + 0.5                   > = 346.17

  > x = oor(x) = oor(346.17)                     > = 346
  -----------------------------------------------------------

> x = x / 10^n^ = 346.17 / 100.0 = 3.46

SELF-CHECK

> 3-7 Trace the same algorithm with the diff erent example problem of
> rounding 9.99 to one decimal place. What is the result? Write the new
> value for x in the space provided (x changes state four times after
> being input).
>
> Algorithm
>
> x n 1. Prompt for the number to round (call it x). ? ?

2.  Input x. 9.99 ?

3.  Prompt for the number of decimal places (call it n). 9.99 ?

4.  Input n. 9.99 1

5.  Let x become x \* 10^n^. \_\_\_\_\_ 1

6.  Add 0.5 to x. \_\_\_\_\_ 1

7.  Let x become oor(x). \_\_\_\_\_ 1

8.  Let x become x divided by 10^n^. \_\_\_\_\_ 1

9.  Display the modifi ed state of x. \_\_\_\_\_ 1

3.2.3 IMPLEMENTATION

> Th e complete C++ source code version is a translation of the previous
> algorithm. Notice that the algorithm steps are embedded as comments in
> the source code to show how each was translated into C++.
>
> // Round a given number to a speci c number of decimal places
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; // For cin and cout \#include &lt;cmath&gt;
> // For pow(10, n) and oor(x) using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> // Declare objects identi ed during analysis double x = 0.0; double n
> = 0.0;

// Algorithm step number:

> // Input cout &lt;&lt; "Enter number to round : "; // 1. cin &gt;&gt;
> x; // 2. cout &lt;&lt; "Enter number of decimal places : " ; // 3. cin
> &gt;&gt; n; // 4.
>
> // Process (Round x to n decimals) x = x \* pow(10, n); // 5a. x = x +
> 0.5; // b. x = oor(x); // c. x = x / pow(10, n); // d.
>
> // Output (Display the modi ed state of x) cout &lt;&lt; "Rounded
> number : " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; endl; // 6.
>
> return 0; }
>
> Dialogue
>
> Enter number to round : ***3.4567***
>
> Enter number of decimal places : ***2***
>
> Rounded number : 3.46

SELF-CHECK

3-8 List three more test cases for the rounding program above.

3-9 What is the fi nal state of x after the user enters 3.15 for x and 1
for n?

> 3-10 Given the table “A Partial List of cmath Functions" on p. 56, fi
> nd a slightly diff erent algorithm that accomplishes the same task
> where 3.15 rounded to one decimal place would be
>
> 3.1 instead of 3.2. (*Hint*: Consider subtracting 0.5 rather than
> adding it.) 3-11 What values are returned with these function calls?

  a\. pow(2.0, 4.0)   d\. oor(1.0)
  ------------------- -------------------
  b\. sqrt(16.0)      e\. fabs(-23.4)
  c\. ceil(-1.7)      f\. pow(4.0, 2.0)

3.3 CALLS TO DOCUMENTED FUNCTIONS

> All functions must fi rst be declared with a function heading so the
> compiler can determine whether the function calls are correct. Th ese
> function headings also help the programmer properly call those
> functions. If you peruse the fi le cmath, you will see many such
> function headings. Th is section concentrates on how to read these
> function headings and how to use other documentation describing what a
> particular function expects and what that function will do. Th ese are
> called the function’s preconditions and postconditions, respectively.

3.3.1 PRECONDITIONS AND POSTCONDITIONS

> For a function to behave properly, certain conditions are presumed.
> Consider the sqrt function, which presumes that the argument is
> greater than or equal to 0.0. Th e *preconditions* of a function state
> assumptions made about arguments to the function. If the preconditions
> are not met, all bets are off —the function’s behavior is undefi ned.
> Some systems cause program termination with an arithmetic overfl ow
> error. Other systems may return values such as -1.\#IND or nan, which
> represents the value “Not a Number.” Th e function call must satisfy
> the preconditions in order to have predictable results.
>
> Th e other part of the contract is the *postconditions*—the statements
> that describe what the function does if the preconditions were met. Th
> e pre- and postconditions are often written as part of the function
> documentation. For example, here is the sqrt function documented with
> preconditions and postconditions:
>
> double sqrt(double x)
>
> // precondition: x is not negative (x &gt;= 0)
>
> // postcondition: Square root of x replaces the function call
>
> Th e comments indicate the argument must be greater than or equal to
> 0.0. If this precondition is met, the square root of that argument is
> returned to the *client*—the code that called the function. If the
> precondition is not met, the result is undefi ned.

  > **Function Call **   **Return Result**
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  sqrt(4.0)              > Th e precondition was met: 2.0 is returned.
  sqrt(-1.0)             > Th e precondition was not met. Th is function call may return nan (not a
                         > number)

> Another implied precondition to calling a function and getting
> predictable results is this: the client code must supply a proper type
> of argument. For example, the ceil function takes one double argument.
> Th is implies the argument must be convertible to a double, which
> includes short, int, oat, and even char. For example, ceil will not
> accept a string argument. Th is could be stated as an obvious
> precondition like this:
>
> double ceil(double x)
>
> // precondition: Argument must be convertible to a double
>
> // postcondition: Return the smallest integer &gt;= x
>
> However, this information is implied in the parameter declaration. Th
> e compiler detects improper argument. From now on, such function
> preconditions will not be written.
>
> Th e compiler does not detect preconditions. For example, it is
> syntactically correct to have a program with this:
>
> cout &lt;&lt; sqrt(-1.0); // Return depends on the system in use
>
> From now on, the label for preconditions will be abbreviated as pre:
> and for postconditions as post:. Th e same function (ceil) may now be
> documented as follows:
>
> double ceil(double x) // post: Return the smallest integer &gt;= x
>
> It should be noted that the use of pre: and post: after the function
> headings is not required. Diff erent people document functions in
> their own ways. Th is documentation is particular to this textbook.

3.3.2 FUNCTION HEADINGS

> Pre- and postconditions help programmers determine the proper use of
> functions. If provided as documentation, they are usually listed after
> the function heading. Th e function heading also provides very
> important usage information such as the type of value returned and the
> number of arguments required by the function. Here is the general form
> of a function heading:

General Form 3.2 *Function Heading*

*return-type function-name* (*parameter-1, parameter-2, parameter-n*)

> Th e *return-type* may be any valid C++ class or the keyword void. A
> void function does not return anything. Th e parameters between ( and
> ) may either be value parameters, reference parameters, or const
> reference parameters. Value parameters are up fi rst.
>
> A function may require one or more arguments. Values are passed to
> functions by adding value parameters of this form:
>
> ©

General Form 3.3 *Value Parameter*

*class-name identi er*

> **Examples of Standard C++ Function Headings:**
>
> int isapha(int c) int tolower(int c); double round (double x); double
> remainder(double numerator, double denom);
>
> Function headings specify the type of value returned by the function,
> the function name, and the number of arguments the programmer must
> supply. Th e class of arguments required is specifi ed as the
> *class-name* of each parameter between the parentheses. For example,
> because the parameters in pow below, x and y, are declared as double,
> one can ascertain that the type of each argument in calls to pow must
> be double, or at least convertible to double—an integer for example.
>
> double pow(double x, double y)
>
> // pre: When y has a fractional part, x must be positive
>
> // When y is an integer, x may be negative
>
> // post: Returns x to the yth power
>
> Also note that the function name is pow and its return type is double.
>
> Although the complete implementation of the pow function is not
> present, the information supplied by the preconditions, the
> postconditions and the function heading are enough to eff ectively
> utilize the function.
>
> To summarize, a function heading with pre- and postconditions provides
> the following information:

1.  the *return-type* that provides the type of value returned by the
    > function

2.  the *function-name* that begins a valid function call

3.  the *parameter-list* that provides the number and class of arguments
    > required in the function call

4.  pre:, which describes what must be true before calling this function

5.  post:, which describes what the function does if the preconditions
    > are met

> In addition to revealing information to programmers, function headings
> supply information to the compiler to verify the validity of every
> attempt to call that function. Th e compiler informs you if a function
> is not called properly. Consider the oor function heading:
>
> double oor(double x)
>
> // post: Returns the largest integer &lt;= x
>
> Th e return type is double. Th is means that a double replaces any
> valid call to oor. Th erefore, the function call can be used wherever
> a double value is legal—in an arithmetic expression, for instance.
> Also present is the function name oor—very important information for
> eff ectively calling this or any particular function. Th e parameter
> list shows one double parameter named x. So the client code must
> supply exactly one numeric argument to properly call oor. For example,
> the following is a valid call to double and it is used in a proper
> spot in the code:

double x; x = oor(5.55555); // This assignment is okay However, these
function calls are invalid:

> string s; s = oor(5.5555); // Error: oor doesn't return a string cout
> &lt;&lt; oor(1.0, 2.0); // Error: too many arguments cout &lt;&lt;
> oor("wrong type"); // Error: wrong type argument cout &lt;&lt; oor();
> // Error: too few arguments

SELF-CHECK

> 3-12 Given the following function heading, write “valid” for each
> correct function call or explain why it is not valid.
>
> double ceil(double x)

  a\. ceil(1.1)        d\. ceil("Ceila")
  -------------------- -------------------
  b\. oor(2.9)         e\. ceil -0.1
  c\. ceil(1.2, 3.0)   f\. ceil(-3)

> 3-13 Describe the error in each of the following attempts at function
> headings:

a.  double f ( x )

b.  int smaller(int n1 int n2)

c.  toUpper(string s)

d.  myClass g()

e.  int twoStrings(string s1, string s2,)

f.  unknownType initialize(" lename.dat")

> Use the following documentation for the questions that follow:
>
> double oor(double x)
>
> // post: The oor function returns a oating-point value
>
> // representing the largest integer that is less than or
>
> // equal to x

14. Write four function calls (with diff erent arguments) that would
    > help explain how oor works to someone who has never seen
    > it before.

15. Write the values returned from each of the four function calls in
    > your answer to the preceding question.

3.3.3 ARGUMENT / PARAMETER ASSOCIATIONS

> A function heading may list zero, one, two, and sometimes more
> parameters. If there is more than one, the parameters must be
> separated by commas. Th e next function heading has two parameters—str
> and x.
>
> double twoParameters(string str, double x)
>
> Exactly one argument of an acceptable class is required for each
> parameter listed in a function heading. Th erefore, precisely two
> arguments must be present in every call to twoParameters. Th e
> compiler will report an error if you call this particular function
> with any other number of arguments than two. Additionally, the type
> and position of the arguments must match the type and position of the
> parameters. For example, a double argument cannot be associated with a
> string parameter. Here are some examples of correct calls of
> twoParameters:
>
> Valid Calls to the twoParameters Function
>
> twoParameters("abc", 1.2); twoParameters("another string", 15);
> twoParameters("\$", 3.4);

Th e following attempts to call twoParameters result in compile time
errors:

  --------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------
  **Error **
  twoParameters("a");
  twoParameters("1.1", "2.2");
  > twoParameters(1.1, 1.1);
  > twoParameters("a", 2.2, 3.3);
  twoParameters;
  --------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------

> Arguments associate with parameters by position—fi rst argument to the
> fi rst parameter, second argument to the second parameter, and so on.
> For example, when twoParameters is called, the fi rst parameter is
> assigned the value of the fi rst argument and the second argument to
> the
>
> function is copied into the second parameter x. When twoParameters is
> called with arguments "abc" and 1.2, like this:
>
> int twoParameters(string str, double x)

result4 = twoParameters ("abc", 1.2); it’s as if these two assignment
operations occur:

> str = "abc"; x = 1.2;
>
> Whatever happens inside twoParameters now depends on the values of
> these two parameters. Th e parameters are used inside the function to
> produce the return result.

SELF-CHECK

> 3-16 What value is sent to parameter str with twoParameters("1st",
> 1.2)?
>
> 3-17 What value is sent to parameter x with twoParameters("2nd", 3.4)?
>
> Much can be deduced from a function heading when it is accompanied by
> the function pre- and postconditions. As review, here is the sin
> function heading complete with pre- and postconditions:
>
> double sin(double x) // post: Returns the sine of x radians
>
> Th e following information is ascertained:

-   What happens: returns the sine of x radians

-   Return type: double

-   Function name: sin

-   Number of arguments: one

-   Type of argument: double (or an expression convertible to double)

> Th e return results can now be determined (with the help of a
> scientifi c calculator in radian mode).

Function Call Return Result

> sin(3.1415926/2.0) 1.0 sin(1.0) 0.8421 // Approximately sin(3.1415926)
> 5.35898e-08 // close to 0.0

SELF-CHECK

> 3-18 Given the following pow function from cmath, complete with
> precondition and postcondition documentation, determine the
> information below:
>
> double pow(double x, double y) // pre: When y has a fractional part, x
> must be positive.
>
> // When y is an integer, x may be negative.
>
> // post: Returns x to the yth power

a.  return type d. class of fi rst argument

b.  function name e. class of second argument

c.  number of arguments f. class of third argument

    19. Write one proper function call to pow.

    20. Is pow(-81.0, 0.5) a valid function call? What is the return
        > value?

    21. Is pow(-10.0, 2) a valid function call? What is the return
        > value?

    22. Is pow(2, 5) a valid function call? What is the return value?

    23. Is pow(4.0, 0.5) a valid function call? What is the return
        > value?

    24. Is pow(5.0) a valid function call? What is the return value?

    25. Write a function heading that returns the fractional component
        > of the fi rst number divided by the second number. Write
        > appropriate pre- and postconditions. For example,
        > remainder(5.0, 2.0) must return 0.5 and remainder(1, 3) must
        > return 0.3333333.

3.3.4 A FEW FUNCTIONS FOR int, char, AND bool

> Some free functions work with the other primitive types. For example,
> the standard C++ library has free functions that can be used in an
> end-of-chapter programming project: min, max, and abs.
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> cout &lt;&lt; min(5, 7) &lt;&lt; endl; cout &lt;&lt; min(5.5, 7.7)
> &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> cout &lt;&lt; max(5, 7) &lt;&lt; endl; cout &lt;&lt; max(5.5, 7.7)
> &lt;&lt; endl; cout &lt;&lt; abs(5 - 7) &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> return 0;
>
> }
>
> Output
>
> 5
>
> 5.5 7
>
> 7.7
>
> 2
>
> Th e min and max functions are defi ned in such a way that the same
> function name can be used with diff erent types. Th ey can take either
> two int arguments or two double arguments, but not a mix.
>
> C++ also has some methods that sound Boolean in nature because of
> names like islower and isdigit. Other functions seem as though they
> should have char parameters and return types because they convert
> characters to their upper or lower case equivalents. Consider the
> function heading for the free function islower when you
> \#include&lt;cctype&gt; to have access to its set of functions to
> classify and transform individual characters.
>
> int islower(int c);
>
> Th is function checks whether c is a lowercase letter. It would seem
> that the parameter should be char and the return type bool like this:
>
> bool islower(char ch); // This is not the function heading
>
> However, C++ allows an int to be assigned to a char and vice versa.
> Arithmetic operations can have a mix of integers and character
> operands.
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> int anInt = 'A'; // 'A' equals 65 char aChar = 67; // 67 equals 'C'
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "anInt: " &lt;&lt; anInt &lt;&lt; endl; cout &lt;&lt;
> "aChar: " &lt;&lt; aChar &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "aChar + anInt: " &lt;&lt; (aChar + anInt) &lt;&lt;
> endl; cout &lt;&lt; "anInt % aChar: " &lt;&lt; (anInt % aChar - 2)
> &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> anInt: 65 aChar: C aChar + anInt: 132 aChar % anInt: 63

More confusion may occur because C++ considers true to be 1 and false to
be 0.

> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> bool aBool = 1; // C++ allows assignment of int to bool int
> anotherBool = false; // and a bool literal to an int cout &lt;&lt;
> aBool &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; anotherBool &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> 1 0
>
> Th e output shows true prints as 1 and false as 0.
>
> If you need to classify if a char is an alphabetic letter like “A” or
> “a”, or a digit such as “9” or “3”, you can use one of the free
> functions from &lt;cctype&gt;. Th is program shows three more cctype
> functions:
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt;
>
> \#include &lt;cctype&gt; // For isalpha isblank isdigit using
> namespace std;
>
> int main() { char ch = 'a';
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isalpha('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isalpha(ch) &lt;&lt; endl; ch = '?';
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isalpha('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isalpha(ch) &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> ch = ' ';
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isblank('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isblank(ch) &lt;&lt; endl; ch = 'N';
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isblank('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isblank(ch) &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> ch = 'P'; // Oh, not zero
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isdigit('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isdigit(ch) &lt;&lt; endl; ch = '5';
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "isdigit('" &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "')? " &lt;&lt;
> isdigit(ch) &lt;&lt; endl;
>
> return 0;
>
> }
>
> Output

isalpha('a')? 1 isalpha('?')? 0 isblank(' ')? 1 isblank('N')? 0
isdigit('P')? 0 isdigit('5')? 1

> Th e toupper and tolower functions convert a character to its
> lowercase or uppercase equivalent. Because the return type for both is
> int instead of char, the functions are cast to char with the code
> (char). Otherwise the output from this program would have been 88 97.
>
> \#include &lt;iostream&gt;
>
> \#include &lt;cctype&gt; // For toupper and tolower using namespace
> std;
>
> int main() { char lower = 't'; char upper = 'A';
>
> // (char) makes sure we the character, not the int cout &lt;&lt;
> (char)toupper(lower) &lt;&lt; endl; // Cast required cout &lt;&lt;
> (char)tolower(upper) &lt;&lt; endl; // to see chars
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> T a

CHAPTER SUMMARY

-   You have been confronted with a large variety of details concerning
    > the C++ programming language, expressions, program development,
    > function calls, and the types of errors that occur during
    > program development. Th is can be somewhat overwhelming at fi rst,
    > especially if you have never programmed before. However, most of
    > these details are necessary for implementation of even the
    > simplest program.

-   \#include&lt;cmath&gt; provides access to many mathematical and
    > trigonometric functions. \#include&lt;cctype&gt; provides access
    > to a set of functions that classify and transform
    > individual characters.

Exercises

-   Functions that have a return type of double can be used wherever a
    > double (or fl oating-point expression) can be used. Many of the
    > cmath functions return double.

-   Most cmath functions require one numeric argument; pow requires two.

-   Preconditions and postconditions represent a contract between the
    > function and the client code that calls the function. Th is
    > documentation and other forms of documentation are intended to
    > help someone understand what the function does.

-   Th e function heading itself provides vital usage information such
    > as the return type, the func-tion name, and the number of
    > parameters so the programmer knows how many arguments to include
    > in the call.

-   Arguments are associated with parameters by position. It doesn’t
    > matter what names are used. Th e fi rst argument is associated
    > with the fi rst parameter, the second argument with the second
    > parameter, and so on.

-   Arguments passed to parameters are like assignment statements. Th e
    > argument must be com-patible with the parameter (the same type).
    > Passing a double to an int results in loss of value.

EXERCISES

1.  Write the return result for each function call or explain the error.

  a\. pow(3.0, 2.0)    g\. fabs(-123.4)
  -------------------- ----------------------
  b\. pow(-2, 5)       h\. sqrt(-1.0)
  c\. ceil(1.001)      i\. sqrt(sqrt(16.0))
  d\. ceil(-1.2)       j\. ceil 1.1
  e\. pow(16.0, 0.5)   k\. oor()
  f\. pow(-16.0, 2)    l\. sqrt(0)

1.  Use these initializations to evaluate the expressions that follow:

> double x = 5.0; double y = 7.5;

  a\. sqrt(x - 1.0)       e\. oor(y + 0.5)
  ----------------------- ------------------
  b\. ceil(y - 0.5)       f\. pow(x, 3.0)
  c\. sqrt(y - x + 2.0)   g\. fabs(y - x)
  d\. pow(10, 2)          h\. pow(10, 3)

1.  What is the value of pow(4, pow(2, 3))?

2.  Write an algorithm that shows the range of a projectile. Th e
    > formula is

*range* = sin(2 \* *angle*) \* *velocity*^2^ / *gravity*

> where *angle* is the angle of the projectile’s takeoff (in radians),
> *velocity* is the initial velocity of the projectile (in meters per
> second), and *gravity* is acceleration due to gravity at 9.8 meters
> per second.

1.  What happens if the client program does not satisfy the
    > preconditions of a called function?

2.  What information do postconditions provide?

3.  Which of the following represent valid function headings?

  a\. int large(int a, int b)      d\. int f(a, int b)
  -------------------------------- ------------------------
  b\. double(double a, double b)   e\. double f()
  c\. int f(int a; int b;)         f\. string c(string a)

1.  Name three possible return types from a C++ function (there
    > are many).

2.  Given the following function heading with pre- and postconditions,
    > write six function calls (with diff erent arguments) that would
    > adequately test fmod and would also help explain how fmod works to
    > someone who has never seen it before.

> double fmod(double x, double y)
>
> // post: Calculates the oating-point remainder.
>
> // fmod returns the oating-point remainder of x / y.
>
> // If the value of y is 0.0, fmod returns Not a Number.
>
> // Header required: &lt;cmath&gt;

1.  Write the values returned from each of the six function calls in
    > your answer to the preceding question.

PROGRAMMING TIPS

1.  When calling existing functions, supply the correct number and type
    > of arguments. Th e function heading and documentation, if present,
    > provide this information. Count the number of parameters between (
    > and ). Make sure each associated argument is the same type, or
    > convertible to that type. An int can be assigned to a oat, a oat
    > to a double, an int to a long, for example.

2.  Don’t mix arguments types with min and max functions. max(2, 3.0)
    > and min(1.0, 4) are compile time errors.

3.  Th ree C++ types appear to be the same. C++ allows integer literals
    > to be treated as character literals and vice versa. Also,
    > underneath, false is 0 and true is 1. Th e reason there is no
    > output here is because aChar is storing the non-printable char
    > value of 1.

Programming Projects

> char aChar = true; // assign 1
>
> cout &lt;&lt; "&gt;" &lt;&lt; aChar &lt;&lt; "&lt;" &lt;&lt; endl; //
> Output: &gt;&lt;

1.  If you do not have the line using namespace std; you will have to
    > prepend std:: before every occurrence of the cmath function
    > you use.

> \#include &lt;iostream&gt; // For cout
>
> \#include &lt;cmath&gt; // for ceil and oor
>
> // using namespace std; Without this, prepend with std::
>
> int main() {
>
> std::cout &lt;&lt; std::ceil(5.99) &lt;&lt; std::endl; // 6 std::cout
> &lt;&lt; std:: oor(5.99) &lt;&lt; std::endl; // 5 }

**PROGRAMMING PROJECTS**

3A cmath FUNCTIONS

> Write a program that allows the user to enter any number. After an
> appropriate label, show the return value from each of the following
> functions (assume x represents the number input by the user):

1.  the square root of x

2.  x to the 2.5 power

3.  the ceiling of x

4.  the fl oor of x

5.  the absolute value of x

> Your dialogue should look like this:
>
> Enter a number for x: ***2.5*** sqrt(x) : 1.5814 pow(x, 2.5) : 6.25
> ceil(x) : 3 oor(x) : 2 fabs(x) : 2.5

3B CIRCLE

> Write a C++ program that inputs a value for the radius of a circle (r)
> from the keyboard and then outputs the diameter, circumference, and
> area of the circle. Use the pow function to compute the area.

-   *diameter* = 2 \* *radius*

-   *circumference* = *pi* \* *diameter*

-   *area* = *pi* \* *radius* ^2^

> Initialize PI as a constant object with the value of 3.14159. Your
> dialogue should look like this (*Note:* Output of fl oating-point
> numbers varies among C++ compilers, so your output might be slightly
> diff erent—especially in the number of decimal places shown for
> Circumference and Area):
>
> Enter Radius: ***1.0***
>
> Diameter: 2.0
>
> Circumference: 6.28318
>
> Area: 3.14159
>
> Run your program with radius = 1.0. Verify that your values for
> circumference and area match the preceding dialogue. After this, run
> your program with the input radii of 2.0 and 2.5 and verify that the
> output is what you expect.

3C MORE ROUNDING

> Write a program that asks the user for a number and displays that
> number rounded to zero, one, two, and three decimal places. Your
> dialogue should look like this:
>
> Enter the number to round: ***3.4567***
>
> 3.4567 rounded to 0 decimals = 3
>
> 3.4567 rounded to 1 decimal = 3.5
>
> 3.4567 rounded to 2 decimals = 3.46
>
> 3.4567 rounded to 3 decimals = 3.457

3D RANGE

> Write a program that determines the *range* of a projectile using this
> formula: *range* = sin(2 \* *angle*) \* *velocity*^2^ / *gravity*
>
> where *angle* is the angle of the projectile’s path (in radians),
> *velocity* is the initial velocity of the projectile (in meters per
> second), and *gravity* is acceleration at 9.8 meters per second (a
> constant). Th e takeoff angle must be input in degrees. Th erefore you
> must convert this angle to its radian equivalent. Th is is necessary
> because the trigonometric function sin(x) assumes the argument (x) is
> an angle expressed in radians. An angle in degrees can be converted to
> radians by multiplying the number of degrees by π/180 where π ≈
> 3.14159. For example, 45° = 45 \* 3.14159/180, or 0.7853975 radians.
> Th e velocity is presumed to be input in meters per second. Make your
> interactive dialogue look like this:
>
> Takeoff angle (in degrees)? ***45.0***
>
> Initial velocity (meters per second)? 100.0
>
> Range = 1020.41 meters

Programming Projects

3E TIME TRAVEL

> For astronauts approaching the speed of light in a spaceship, time
> passes more slowly. Also, the weight of their spaceship increases. Th
> e Lorentz factor indicates this change in time and weight depends on
> the spaceship velocity v
>
> 1 *factor* =
>
> where *v* is velocity and *c* is the speed of light (299,792,458
> meters/second). Th e *factor* can be used to compute how much
> perceived time is decreased for the astronauts and by how much the
> weight of their spaceship is increased. For example, at 74948114.5
> meters per second (1/4 the speed of light) the factor is 1.038. Time’s
> passage is reduced by the factor and the weight is increased by that
> factor.
>
> Write a program that reads the weight of the spaceship on earth
> (90,000 kilograms), the fraction of the speed of light (0.25, less
> than 1.0), and the distance to travel in light years (Alpha Centauri
> is about 4.35 light years away).

**Dialog 1:**

> Weight of spaceship on earth in kilograms? ***90000***
>
> Velocity as a fraction of the speed of light 0.0 to 1.0? ***0.25***
>
> Distance to travel in light years? ***4.35***
>
> Travel time: 4.35 light years
>
> Perceived time: 4.21187 years
>
> Earth weight of spaceship: 90000 kg

Weight of spaceship: 92951.6 kg traveling at 7.49481e+07 m/s **Dialog
2:**

> Weight of spaceship on earth in kilograms? ***90000***
>
> Velocity as a fraction of the speed of light 0.0 to 1.0? ***0.9***
>
> Distance to travel in light years? ***4.35***
>
> Travel time: 4.35 light years
>
> Perceived time: 1.89612 years
>
> Earth weight of spaceship: 90000 kg
>
> Weight of spaceship: 206474 kg tra veling at 2.69813e+08 m/s

