**C H A P T E R N I N E**

File Streams

SUMMING UP

> Th e major control structures have now been presented—sequence,
> selection, and repetition. In the previous chapter, two major
> repetitive patterns emerged. Th e Determinate Loop pattern is used
> when the number of repetitions can be determined in advance. Th e
> Indeterminate Loop pattern occurs so frequently that the while loop is
> part of almost every programming language.

COMING UP

> Chapter 9 presents two standard C++ classes—ifstream for obtaining
> input from an external fi le on a disk, and ofstream for saving
> program output onto a disk fi le. Processing input from a disk fi le
> is a classic instance of the Indeterminate Loop pattern. After
> studying this chapter, you will be able to
>
> use ifstream objects for disk fi le input use ofstream objects for
> disk fi le output

9.1 ifstream OBJECTS

> Because keyboard input is fairly common, inclusion of <iostream>
> was designed to make cin immediately available. Th e cin object is
> automatically initialized and associated with the keyboard. However,
> input may also be obtained from many other sources, such as a mouse, a
> disk fi le, or a graphics tablet. An ifstream object is needed to read
> data from a disk fi le.
>
> Th e ifstream (input fi le stream) class is declared in fstream. Th
> erefore, this compiler directive must be added to programs intended to
> extract input from a disk fi le:
>
> \#include <fstream> // For the ifstream class
>
> Th e ifstream class is similar to the istream class. For example, the
> familiar extraction operator >> is also used to input data from
> a fi le stored on a disk. Th e same rules that apply to keyboard input
> for ints, doubles, and strings also apply to input from a fi le.

An ifstream object is often constructed with the fi le name it will be
associated with.

> 263
>
> **General Form 9.1** *Initializing* ifstream *objects for existing fi
> les *
>
> ifstream *object-name* (" *le-name*");
>
> Th e le-name is the name of an existing disk fi le. If the fi le is
> not found, the ifstream object initialization fails and an attempt to
> use the object name for input will fail. Th e state of the ifstream
> object can be tested immediately to determine if the fi le was found.
>
> In the next example, inFile is the object name and "input.data" is the
> associated operating system fi le name.
>
> ifstream inFile("input.data"); // Construct an ifstream object
>
> Now this code will read input from the fi le input.data rather than
> from the keyboard.
>
> inFile >> intObject;
>
> Th e following program uses an ifstream object to read three integers
> from a disk fi le. Notice that there are a few diff erences between
> programs that extract keyboard input and the one below:

-   Before, programs used cin—an istream object—for keyboard input. Now
    > inFile—an ifstream object—is used for fi le input.

-   Whereas cin is automatically constructed, your program must
    > construct an ifstream object with an existing disk fi le name
    > associated with it.

-   Prompts aren’t needed anymore. Th e same >> operator reads an
    > integer and stores it into the int object, but there is no need to
    > prompt the fi le for the next input.

> // Include fstream for I/O streams dealing with disk les
>
> \#include <fstream> // For the ifstream class
>
> \#include <iostream> // For cout using namespace std;
>
> int main() { int n1, n2, n3;
>
> // Initialize an ifstream object so inFile is an input stream //
> associated with the operating system le named input.data ifstream
> inFile("input.data");
>
> // Extract three integers from the le input.data inFile >> n1
> >> n2 >> n3; cout << "n1: " << n1 <<
> endl; cout << "n2: " << n2 << endl; cout <<
> "n3: " << n3 << endl;
>
> return 0;
>
> }

9.1: ifstream Objects

Assuming the fi le input.data stores these three integers:

> 70 80 90 this output is generated:
>
> Output
>
> n1: 70 n2: 80 n3: 90
>
> If the fi le input.data stores these three integers:
>
> -45 77 23 this output is generated:
>
> Output
>
> n1: -45 n2: 77 n3: 23
>
> File input works just like keyboard input—spaces and new lines
> separate the input data. Th is applies to all data seen so far:
> string, int, and double. If an integer is encountered in the fi le
> during an attempt to read a double, the int is promoted to a double.
> Th e one input diff erence is this: with an ifstream object, keyboard
> input is not necessary for stream extraction. Once the program begins
> to run, data can be read from the disk fi le without user input.

SELF-CHECK

> 9-1 Write a complete program that reads the fi rst 30 strings from an
> input fi le named student.data and displays each string to the screen.
> Remember to \#include <fstream>.

9.1.1 GETTING THE PATH RIGHT

> If your input fi le is not stored in the current working directory,
> you may need to use an operating system path to locate it. For
> Windows, which uses \\ to separate directory names, you need the
> escape sequence \\\\ (two backslashes) to specify full path names. So
> the fi le name may appear like this:
>
> ifstream inFile( "c:\\\\mystuff\\\\input.data" );
>
> “\\\\” represents only one backslash. Omitting one \\ from \\\\ is
> virtually guaranteed to result in not fi nding the fi le:
>
> ifstream inFile( "c:\\mystuff\\input.data" ); // Need \\\\, not \\
>
> Th is problem doesn’t exist in Unix because the / character is used to
> separate directories, and so / can be used “as is”:
>
> ifstream inFile("myC++Stuff/input.data");
>
> Also consider what happens if the fi le is not found. Input operations
> such as inFile >> will not execute. If you don’t seem to be
> extracting input from the fi le or the values appear to be garbage,
> chances are the fi le does not exist as specifi ed, it has a diff
> erent name, it’s in a diff erent directory, you used \\ rather than
> \\\\ in DOS or Windows, or your disk is bad, or. . . .
>
> You can use the following alternate selection action to ensure that
> the user is notifi ed that the fi le has not been found:
>
> if( ! inFile ) {
>
> // If true, the input le was not found. cout << "Failed to nd
> the le." << endl;
>
> } else {
>
> // Process le input data // . . .
>
> }

9.2 THE INDETERMINATE LOOP PATTERN APPLIED TO DISK FILES

> Th e previous chapter on repetition showed how sentinel loops process
> an undetermined number of keyboard inputs. Th e same type of logic
> works with the *end-of-fi le event*, which requires some knowledge of
> the operating system you are using. Th e end-of-fi le event is entered
> from the keyboard using the key sequence Ctrl-Z (\^Z) with Windows or
> Ctrl-D (\^D) in Unix.
>
> When the end-of-fi le event is encountered on an input stream, the
> input statement (cin >>, for example) returns false (0,
> actually). So once again, the cin statement can be used as a loop test
> for processing an undetermined number of inputs.
>
> while(cin >> x) { // Input value at start of each iteration
>
> // Process value
>
> }
>
> Each time the cin statement returns true, the valid input is
> processed. When the user enters the end-of-fi le key sequence (Ctrl-C
> in DOS or Ctrl-D in Unix), the state of cin is altered to return false
> and the loop terminates.
>
> Th e loop in the following program terminates when the user enters end
> of fi le. Th e loop test (cin >> x) returns false when end-of-fi
> le is detected.

9.2: The Indeterminate Loop Pattern Applied to Disk Files

> Dialogue
>
> Enter doubles, Ctrl-D, Ctrl-Z, or Command-Period to quit
>
> 1 3 4 \^D
>
> Average: 2.66667
>
> A word of warning: End-of-fi le sets the state of the input stream
> such that subsequent keyboard input is ignored unless some extra work
> is performed.

SELF-CHECK

9-2 What is the output of the preceding program if the user enters
end-of-fi le fi rst?

9.2.1 PROCESSING UNTIL END-OF-FILE

> You can use the end-of-fi le event to process all data in a fi le
> without determining the amount of data in that fi le beforehand. Th is
> is shown in the next program where an indeterminate loop breaks the
> loop when there is no more data in inFile—the end of the input fi le
> was detected.
>
> // Count how many numbers are in a disk le. The ifstream object //
> named is used as the input stream, not cin.
>
> \#include <fstream> // For the ifstream class
>
> \#include <iostream> using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> ifstream inFile("numbers.data"); double x = 0.0; // Store le inputs
> here temporarily int n = 0;
>
> if( ! inFile ) {
>
> // If true, the input le was not found
>
> cout << "Failed to nd the le numbers.data" << endl;
>
> } else { cout << "The le was successfully constructed" <<
> endl; while( inFile >> x ) { n++; // Track the number of loops
>
> cout << "iteration \#" << n << ": " << x
> << endl;
>
> } cout << "End of le reached. " << n << " numbers
> found." << endl;
>
> } return 0; }
>
> To visualize this loop action, the repeated part simply displays each
> successfully extracted number. Th e output shown below appears when
> the fi le named input.data contains the following four numbers:
>
> 0.001 9
>
> 8.0
>
> 1.5
>
> Output
>
> The le was successfully constructed iteration \#1: 0.001 iteration
> \#2: 9 iteration \#3: 8 iteration \#4: 1.5
>
> End of le reached. 4 numbers found.

SELF-CHECK

9-3 What is the output of the preceding program if:

a.  the fi le numbers.data does not exist?

b.  the fi le numbers.data contains one number?

c.  the fi le numbers.data contains zero numbers (the fi le is empty)?

> 9-4 Write the output of the following program with the various data
> stored in the fi le input.data. (*Note:* inFile >> intObject
> will fail if an invalid number is encountered in the input fi le
> stream; input need not be on separate lines.)

a.  1 2 3 c. 1 2 3 BAD

b.  1 2 3 4 5 d. 1.5 2.6 3.7

> \#include <fstream> // For the ifstream class
>
> \#include <iostream> // For cout using namespace std; int main()
> {
>
> ifstream inFile("input.data"); int sum = 0; int intObject;
> while(inFile >> intObject) { sum += intObject;
>
> }
>
> cout << sum << endl; return 0; }

9.2.2 LETTING THE USER SELECT THE FILE NAME

> It is sometimes appropriate to allow the user to enter the fi le name
> while the program is running. In this situation, it is appropriate to
> read the fi le name as a string. However, the string object itself
> cannot be used to initialize an ifstream object.
>
> string leName; cout << "Enter le name: "; cin >> leName;
>
> ifstream inFile( leName);
>
> // ERROR: ifstream::ifstream(string) not found
>
> Th e ifstream constructor needs the character portion of a string,
> which is returned with string::c\_str. Th is message returns the
> characters of the string object.
>
> ifstream inFile( leName.c\_str() );

9.3 INDETERMINATE LOOP WITH MORE COMPLEX DISK FILE INPUT

> Th e Indeterminate Loop pattern is often used to process data stored
> in a fi le—and that data can be quite complex. To accomplish this, the
> programmer must know the format of that data or must be able to
> specify their format. Th is is possible even if there is a collection
> of input data of diff erent types and those data are spread out over
> two or more lines.
>
> Th e example of this section uses an input fi le where all data
> concerning one employee is stored on one line in the fi le. Th e
> algorithm works like this: input one line of data and process it until
> there is no more data. Th e termination condition is end of fi le. So
> the loop test would be:
>
> while (there is data in the input stream) process the newly read data
>
> An indeterminate loop is capable of processing an unspecifi ed number
> of inputs with data that need not be entered from the keyboard. With
> the end-of-fi le event as the termination condition, the number of
> iterations depends on the size of the fi le. Th e loop is easily
> written to eff ectively process all the employee data in a fi le
> whether there are zero, one, two, or many employees. For example, if
> the fi le employee.data contains the following data,
>
> 12.00 1 S Milan Archer
>
> 12.44 2 M Lennon Arrowsmith
>
> 11.11 3 M Oakley Baxter
>
> 10.00 0 S Charlie Bond a properly constructed loop should process
> exactly four employees. Th e same code should also work with fi les of
> diff erent sizes (diff erent numbers of employees). Th is is an
> advantage over determinate loops that require the number of iterations
> to be determined before the loop begins to execute.
>
> Th e next program implements a loop that uses the end-of-fi le event
> as the termination condition. During the loop test, all items needed
> to construct one Employee object (class Employee) are read from the
> ifstream object referenced by inFile.
>
> while(inFile >> hourlyRate >> exemptions >>
> maritalStatus >> rstName >> lastName) {
>
> // process the data
>
> }

If there are enough data (of the proper format), the while loop executes
the repeated part.

> Once inside this block, a new Employee object is constructed with the
> fi le input data just read in.
>
> Employee anEmp(name, hourlyRate, maritalStatus, exemptions);
>
> For each employee on fi le, the getGrossPay() message is sent to each
> Employee after setting the hours worked for the week.
>
> // This program reads data from an input le to construct Employee
> objects, // set the hours worked for the week, and show the gross pay
> for each.
>
> \#include <iostream>
>
> \#include <fstream> // For the ifstream class using namespace
> std; \#include "Employee.h" // For the Employee class
>
> int main() { string rstName, lastName; double hourlyRate,
> hoursThisWeek; int exemptions; string maritalStatus;
>
> // Initialize an input stream with a disk le as the source ifstream
> inFile("employee.data"); if (!inFile) {
>
> // Show error if the le "payroll.data" is not found on the disk cout
> << "\*\*Error opening le 'employee.data'" << endl;
>
> } else {
>
> // Process data until end of le while (inFile >> hourlyRate
> >> exemptions >> maritalStatus
>
> >> rstName >> lastName) { string name (lastName + ", " +
> rstName); cout << "Hours worked for " << name << "?
> "; cin >> hoursThisWeek;
>
> Employee anEmp(name, hourlyRate, maritalStatus, exemptions);
> anEmp.setHoursWorked(hoursThisWeek); // Print the gross pay in a
> minimum of 3 spaces with 2 decimals places
>
> // with a preceding \$ and a new line '\\n' after the gross pay.
>
> printf("\$%3.2f \\n", anEmp.getGrossPay());
>
> }
>
> } return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> Hours worked for Archer, Milan? ***40***
>
> \$480.00
>
> Hours worked for Arrowsmith, Lennon? ***30***
>
> 373.20
>
> Hours worked for Baxter, Oakley? ***0*** \$0.00
>
> Hours worked for Bond, Charlie? ***42***
>
> \$430.00
>
> Notice that the output shows exactly four employees. Had the disk fi
> le contained a diff erent number of employees, a diff erent-sized
> report would have been generated without any change to the program or
> the need to determine the number of employees beforehand. Th is is a
> good time to use an indeterminate loop.

SELF-CHECK

> 9-5 Describe what would happen if the S were omitted from the last
> line in the fi le used for input in the preceding program:
>
> 12.00 1 S Milan Archer
>
> 12.44 2 M Lennon Arrowsmith
>
> 11.11 3 M Oakley Baxter
>
> 10.00 0 Charlie Bond
>
> 9-6 Describe what would happen if the 0 were omitted from the last
> line in the fi le used for input in the preceding program:
>
> 12.00 1 S Milan Archer
>
> 12.44 2 M Lennon Arrowsmith
>
> 11.11 3 M Oakley Baxter
>
> 10.00 S Charlie Bond

9.3.1 MIXING NUMBERS AND STRINGS

> Th e preceding self-checks point to a problem that occurs when input
> contains numbers, characters, and strings. If one line of input is
> incorrect, the program will likely fail or produce incorrect output.
> Consider the following incorrect input:
>
> 12.00 S 1 Milan Archer
>
> When that input is read and executes:
>
> while(inFile >> hourlyRate >> exemptions >>
> maritalStatus >> rstName >> lastName)
>
> Th e fi rst time through the loop, the S is encountered while
> attempting to read an integer for exemptions. Th e input stream fails.
> Th e loop terminates. No objects are constructed inside the loop. Th
> is results from a fi le with just one out-of-place piece of data. If
> you are having problems reading data from a fi le, make sure the input
> statement has the proper objects and that the input fi le has the
> correct data.

9.3.2 THE getline FUNCTION

> Th e previous example works because the program assumed there were two
> strings at the end of each line in the fi le. And just as importantly,
> the fi le had exactly two strings at the end of every line. But
> consider what would happen if the program could not assume there were
> going to be exactly two strings. For example, what if some employees
> had a middle initial, some had none, and others had two middle names
> for a total of four distinct strings in their names?
>
> 12.00 1 S Milan J. Archer
>
> 12.44 2 M Lennon Arrowsmith
>
> 11.11 3 M Oakley S. T. Baxter
>
> 10.00 0 S Charlie Bond
>
> Th e previous program read a fi le in which each line ended with a fi
> rst name followed by a last name. An alternative approach would now be
> required to read the string input at the end of each line in the fi le
> above. Th is can be accomplished with a function named getline from
> the string library.
>
> Here is a simplifi ed function heading for the getline function.
> Notice that two parameters have &, so they modify the arguments in the
> caller.
>
> istream & getline(istream & is, string & str, char sentinel = '\\n')
> // post: Extracts string input from is (with blanks) until the end
>
> // of line has been encountered
>
> Th is comes in handy for reading things like names and addresses. Th e
> nonmember getline function extracts all the characters from the input
> fi le stream until the end of fi le is encountered or the new-line
> character '\\n' is found. Th is means that blank spaces normally used
> to separate strings become part of one larger string value.
>
> Th e fi rst argument to getline is any input fi le stream—cin or
> inFile, for example. Th e second argument is any string object that
> will be modifi ed by getline. Th e string object will store all the
> characters from the current input stream until end of line. Th e third
> argument is optional.
>
> If omitted, the end-of-string marker is the new-line character '\\n'.
>
> Th is is the fi rst example of a *default argument*. With the
> assignment of '\\n' to sentinel in the parameter list, the getline
> function can be called with only two arguments. In this case, the
> third parameter is automatically assigned the value of the expression
> to the right of =. Th is is called a default argument. Th erefore, the
> following two calls to getline are equivalent:
>
> string fullName;
>
> getline(inFile, fullName, '\\n'); getline(inFile, fullName);
>
> On the other hand, you can specify the third argument to be any
> sentinel character you wish. So to read an entire sentence from the
> keyboard, use this:
>
> string sentence;
>
> cout << "Enter a sentence ended with a period <'.'>: "
> << endl; getline(cin, sentence, '.');
>
> // assert: sentence has all characters up to, but not including //
> '.'. The '.' is pulled out of input stream (discarded).
>
> Th e getline function also returns a reference to the input stream. Th
> e return value is true unless the end of fi le or the sentinel is
> found. Th is means getline can be used as a loop test. Th e following
> program demonstrates how getline can be used to read all the lines in
> any input fi le. Th e input is the program itself, so the number of
> lines should be 17.
>
> \#include <iostream> // 1 File name: getline.cpp
>
> \#include <fstream> // 2 \#include <string> // 3 using
> namespace std; // 4
>
> // 5 int main() { // 6 string aLine; // 7 ifstream
> inFile("getline.cpp"); int lineCount = 0; // 9 // 10
> while(getline(inFile, aLine)) { lineCount++; // 12 } // 13 // 14
>
> cout << "Lines in getline.cpp: " << lineCount <<
> endl; return 0; // 16 } // 17
>
> Output
>
> Lines in getline.cpp: 17

SELF-CHECK

9-7 What is the value of street when the user enters each line at the
prompt?

a\. 1313 Mockingbird Lane. b. 1214 Chestnut Drive.

> \#include <iostream> // For cout
>
> \#include <string> // For getline and string using namespace
> std; int main() { string street;
>
> cout << "Enter street address, end with a period <.> "
> << endl; getline(cin, street, '.'); cout << street; return
> 0; }
>
> Getting back to the problem of reading names that may have one, two,
> three, or any number of spaces, the while loop for the payroll problem
> could now be replaced by this to allow for any number of names.
>
> string fullName;
>
> // Process data until end of le
>
> while (inFile >> hourlyRate >> exemptions >>
> maritalStatus
>
> && (getline(inFile, fullName))) { // Extract rst blank character in
> fullName fullName = fullName.substr(1, fullName.length() - 1); cout
> << "Hours worked for " << fullName << "? "; cin
> >> hoursThisWeek;
>
> Employee anEmp(fullName, hourlyRate, maritalStatus, exemptions);
> anEmp.setHoursWorked(hoursThisWeek);
>
> // Print the gross pay in a minimum of 3 spaces with 2 decimals places
>
> // with a \$ and a new line '\\n' after the gross pay.
>
> printf("\$%3.2f \\n", anEmp.getGrossPay()); }

9.4 OFSTREAM OBJECTS

> Th is section introduces class ofstream (output fi le stream) for
> storing program output to more permanent disk fi les. Th e ofstream
> class is a specialization of the ostream class, just as ifstream is a
> specialization of the istream class. Th erefore, the operations and
> messages that could be sent to cout can also be sent to ofstream
> objects.
>
> \#include <iostream> // For cout
>
> \#include <fstream> // For the ofstream class using namespace
> std; int main() {
>
> ofstream outFile("out.data");
>
> outFile << "This string goes to a disk, not the screen" <<
> endl; double x = 1.23; outFile << x << endl;
> outFile.width(30); outFile << x << endl;
>
> cout << "This string goes to the screen" << endl; return
> 0; }
>
> Output (to the fi le associated with the object named outFile)
>
> This string goes to a disk le, not the screen
>
> 1.23
>
> 1.23
>
> 1.23

Chapter Summary

> Output (to the screen)
>
> This string goes to the screen

SELF-CHECK

9-8 What output goes to the disk fi le named out.data?

> ofstream out("out.data"); for(int j = 1; j <= 5; j++) cout <<
> j << " ";

CHAPTER SUMMARY

-   An ifstream object may be associated with a disk fi le so large that
    > amounts of data may be input quickly—with no human intervention.

-   Th e ! operator is overloaded to determine if a fi le has not been
    > properly opened for input.

-   Use the input operator >> in the loop test to read input until
    > the end of any fi le of any size.

-   You can use ofstream objects like cout. Th e only diff erence is
    > that the output goes to a disk fi le rather than the
    > computer screen.

EXERCISES

1.  What does ifstream stand for?

2.  Write the code that declares an input stream named inFile associated
    > with the fi le called numbers.data located in the current working
    > folder (directory).

3.  Which \#include is needed to construct ifstream objects?

4.  Write a complete C++ program with the correct \#includes with a loop
    > that counts the number of words contained in a fi le. A word is
    > any collection of characters separated by spaces, tabs, or
    > new lines. For example, there are 14 words in the following
    > sentence (recall that string constants are separated by blanks,
    > tabs, and new lines):

> Here's one word, another, and another. There are a total of 14 words
> here.

1.  Write a sentinel event-controlled loop that counts the number of
    > perfect test scores (the number 100) in a fi le named tests.data.

> PROGRAMMING TIPS
>
> 1\. Use getline to read strings with blank spaces. Sometimes several
> strings represent one string input. When asking for someone’s name or
> address and you don’t know how many values will be input, use the
> getline function.
>
> string address;
>
> cout << "Enter your address: "; getline(cin, address); cout
> << "Address: " << address << endl;
>
> Dialogue
>
> Enter your address: ***1313 Mockingbird Lane, Washington D.C.***
>
> Address: 1313 Mockingbird Lane, Washington D.C.

2.  Be careful when using getline and >> together. Be careful when
    > mixing getline with the >> operator on the same
    > input stream. Th e >> operator skips whitespace; getline
    > does not. Worse yet, cin >> will stop at the new line. A
    > subsequent getline will go up to the new line, eff ectively
    > reading nothing. In this case, you will need an extra getline to
    > get beyond the end of the line.

3.  Use test drivers for reading complex data. Seemingly bizarre things
    > can occur when you try to input complex data in an end-of-fi
    > le loop. Consider fi rst writing a test driver with code that
    > inputs the fi rst line from the fi le and then displays it.

4.  Input is messy. Using istream >> and getline on the same input
    > stream can cause diffi cultto-detect errors. Additionally, when
    > there is a mix of integer, fl oating-point, character, and string
    > input, it is not always easy to get the input statements correct.
    > Th e number of objects in an input statement must always
    > be correct. Th e input fi le must always be correct.

> **PROGRAMMING PROJECTS**

9A WIND SPEEDS ON FILE

> Write a program that determines the lowest, highest, and average of a
> set of wind speed readings from a fi le. Th e number of readings is
> not known in advance. First create a fi le in your working
>
> (current) directory as wind.data and use the ifstream constructor to
> open the fi le for input as follows:
>
> ifstream inFile("wind.data");

Programming Projects

> Th e program should work for all fi les containing only ints so any
> number of inputs should produce correct results. Run your program with
> the following fi le named wind.dat. Verify that the output is correct
> by producing results by hand and comparing your output.
>
> 2 6 1 2 5
>
> 5 4 3 12 16
>
> 10 11 12 13 14

9B WORDS IN A FILE

> Write a C++ program that approximates the number of words in a fi le
> that has the fi le name input by the user. Remember to use
> string::c\_str to initialize the ifstream object.
>
> cin >> leName;
>
> ifstream inFile( leName.c\_str());

9C PAYROLL REPORT (PREREQUISITE 7D: CLASS EMPLOYEE)

> In this project you are asked to use your Employee class as the basis
> for a payroll program that processes many employees. Th e input data
> to be processed are stored in an external fi le with the following
> format:
>
> Sam Barker 40.0 15.00 2 S
>
> Casey Baker 42.0 12.00 3 M
>
> Joey Cook 30.5 9.99 1 S
>
> Chris Glazer 40.0 11.57 1 M
>
> Create a report in a new fi le named payroll.report that looks like
> the following (with ? replaced by the correct answers, of course).
> Also show all totals for every category except the pay rate (*Note:*
> Income tax is based in the 2015 Employer Tax Guide; this changes
> yearly).
>
> Output fi le named payroll.report
>
> Pay Hours Gross Income SocSec Medi Net Employee
>
> Rate Worked Pay Tax Tax care Pay Name
>
> ===== ==== ======= ====== ====== ====== ======== =======
>
> 15.00 40.0 600.00 51.43 37.20 8.70 502.67 Barker, Sam
>
> 12.00 42.0 ? ? ? ? ? Baker, Casey
>
> 9.99 30.5 ? ? ? ? ? Cook, Joey
>
> 11.57 40.0 ? ? ? ? ? Glazer, Chris ------ --------- ------ ------
> ------- -------- Totals 152.5 ??????.?? ????.?? ????.?? ????.??
> ????.??

© 2018 Franklin, Beedle & Associates All rights reserved
