**C H A P T E R E L E V E N**

Generic Collections

SUMMING UP

> You have now experienced generic vector objects as a way to store a
> collection of related elements of a specifi c type.

COMING UP

> Th is chapter introduces another collection class named Set to provide
> a review of vector processing, class defi nitions, and member function
> implementations. Th is chapter also introduces the C++ template
> mechanism that allows a collection to store a specifi c type of
> object. After studying this chapter you will be able to

-   build your own collection class to store any type of element

-   better understand classes with data members, constructors, and
    > member functions

-   better understand how to develop functions that involve vector
    > processing

11.1 COLLECTION CLASSES

> As you continue your study of computing, you will spend a fair amount
> of time exploring ways to manage collections of data. Th e vector
> class presented in the previous chapter is only one of many classes
> designed for just this purpose. Collection classes have the following
> characteristics:

-   Th eir main responsibility is to store a collection of objects.

-   Th ey usually add and remove objects from the collection.

-   Th ey allow access to individual elements in a variety of ways.

> Th e Set collection class used in this chapter provides a review of
> class defi nitions and member function implementations. Th is time,
> however, member functions will employ vectorprocessing algorithms. You
> will also learn how collection classes can be made to store only a
> specifi c type. Th e type can be passed as an argument to the class
> when constructed.
>
> Th e main purpose of the Set class is to store a collection of unique
> objects. A Set object has the following characteristics:
>
> 325

-   A Set may store any type of object, as shown with class vector.

-   Set elements are unique—duplicate elements are not allowed. Set
    > elements need not be maintained in any particular order.

> A Set object will understand the messages isEmpty, insert, remove,
> size, and contains. Data members include a vector named elements,
> which stores a collection, and an integer named n to store the current
> number of elements in the Set object. Before discussing this new type,
> consider the C++ template mechanism that permits one class to store
> any type of object.

11.1.1 PASSING TYPES AS ARGUMENTS

> Expressions such as x or 1.5 can be passed as arguments to functions.
> Class names (types) such as int, double, string, and BankAccount can
> also be passed as arguments using the C++ template mechanism,
> <int> or <string> for example. Passing type names as
> arguments allows programmers to use the same collection class to hold
> any type of object. Th is means we need only one Set class instead of
> a diff erent Set class for every type to be stored.
>
> Th e C++ Standard Template Library (STL) uses the template mechanism
> to implement the standard collection types such as vector, list,
> stack, and queue. Rather than implementing a vector, list, stack, and
> queue for each new type of element that a programmer might think of,
> the compiler instead uses the single class template to create them
> automatically.
>
> For each class name passed as an argument, a new class is
> automatically created to manage collections of that class. For
> example, we can have sets of any type:
>
> Set<string> ids; // Store string objects only
>
> Set<double> nums; // Store numbers only
>
> Set<BankAccount> accounts; // Store BankAccount objects only
>
> Another advantage to templates is that we can restrict the type to
> insert only that one type. For example, these messages compile:
>
> ids.insert("c1w4"); nums.insert(123);
> accounts.insert(BankAccount("c1w4", 100.00));
>
> Th ese messages will not compile since the argument is not the proper
> type (which is a good thing, actually).
>
> ids.insert(123); // Argument must be a string nums.insert("c1w4"); //
> Argument must be a num accounts.insert(100.00); // Argument must be a
> BankAccount

11.1.2 TEMPLATES

> Type parameters allow programmers to pass a data type to a class to
> communicate the desired type of element to store.

11.1: Collection Classes

General Form 11.1 *Class templates*

> template<class *template-parameter*> class *class\_name*
>
> Template declarations written before a class give the template
> parameter scope that extends throughout the entire class defi nition.
> For example, the Set template class in C++ could begin like this:
>
> template<class Type> class Set { public:
>
> // Allow insertion of only one speci c type void insert (Type
> element);
>
> Th e Set type makes frequent use of the template parameter named Type.
> For example, when a Set is constructed like this:
>
> Set <string> names; the parameter Type is replaced by the Type
> name that was passed as the argument between angle brackets, which is
> string here. C++ then generates this code:
>
> void insert(string element);
>
> However, if a constructor were invoked to initialize a Set of ints as
> in
>
> Set <int> x;
>
> C++ generates this code where Type gets replaced with int:
>
> void insert(int element);
>
> Because Set is declared as a template class, the compiler can use it
> as a model to build any number of other classes to store diff erent
> types of elements as a Set.
>
> Th e class parameter named Type has scope that extends to the end of
> the class defi nition. Th is means that Type may be used anywhere in
> the class defi nition, such as in the public section or in the private
> data member section. For example, writing the type parameter (named
> Type here) before the class defi nition is critically important to the
> templated types:
>
> template<class Type> class Set { public: Set();
>
> Type insert(Type element) private:
>
> Type key;
>
> };
>
> Th e public method insert will accept parameters only of Type passed
> as the Type argument. Th e type of the private data member key is also
> the type passed as the Type argument. At declaration, the Type
> identifi er is replaced with the argument specifi ed at declaration.
> For example, these object initializations cause s1 and s2 to become
> templated to string and double, respectively:

Set <string> s1; Set <double> s2;

template<class Type> template<class Type>

> class Set { class Set { public: public: Set(); Set();

void insert(string element){ void insert(double index){ }

} private:

private: double key;

string key; };

> };

Here is a sample program to summarize the capabilities of the generic
Set class:

> \#include <iostream>
>
> \#include <string> using namespace std; \#include "Set.h" // For
> a generic (with templates) Set class
>
> int main() {
>
> Set<string> names;
>
> cout << "After contruction, size is " << names.size()
> << endl; // 0 cout << "and the Set isEmpty: " <<
> names.isEmpty() << endl; // true
>
> // Add a few elements, duplicates not allowed names.insert("Chris");
> names.insert("Chris"); names.insert("Dakota"); names.insert("River");
>
> names.remove("River"); // Succeeds names.remove("Not here"); // No
> change to the Set
>
> cout << endl << "After 4 insert attempts and 2 remove
> attempts: " << endl; cout << "isEmpty: " <<
> names.isEmpty() << endl; // false cout << "size: "
> << names.size() << endl; // 2 cout <<
> "contains(\\"Chris\\")? " << names.contains("Chris") <<
> endl; cout << "contains(\\"Dakota\\")? " <<
> names.contains("Dakota") << endl; cout <<
> "contains(\\"River\\")? " << names.contains("River") <<
> endl; cout << "contains(\\"No\\")? " <<
> names.contains("No") << endl;
>
> return 0;
>
> }

11.1: Collection Classes

> Output (1 means true, 0 means false)
>
> After contruction, size is 0 and the Set isEmpty: 1
>
> After 4 insert attempts and 2 remove attempts:
>
> isEmpty: 0 size: 2 contains("Chris")? 1 contains("Dakota")? 1
> contains("River")? 0 contains("No")? 0
>
> One of the advantages of this Set class, and an issue that becomes
> important in many applications, is the number of elements that may be
> stored with one Set object. Th e maximum number of set elements cannot
> always be determined in advance. Th e number of objects that may be
> contained in one Set object depends on the size of the objects and the
> amount of available memory in the free store. Th e best answer is
> this: the class Set will store as many objects as memory allows; there
> is no fi xed maximum size. Th e logic that handles this will be in the
> insert method.
>
> To remove an object from a Set, the equality operator == must be defi
> ned for the type pass as a type parameter because it will be used in
> contains and remove messages. Here is code from
>
> BankAccount.cpp that overloads the == operator to return true if the
> name of the BankAccount to the left of == is equal to the name of the
> argument to the right of ==.
>
> // Overload the == operator to compare two BankAccount objects bool
> BankAccount::operator == (const BankAccount& right) const { return
> name == right.name; }
>
> Th e binary operator == can now be applied to BankAccount objects:
>
> BankAccount acct1("Ali", 123.44);
>
> BankAccount acct2("Ali", 567.88);
>
> BankAccount acct3("Billie", 567.88);
>
> if(acct1 == acct2 && !(acct1 == acct3)) // true cout << "acct1
> == acct, but not acct3: " << endl;
>
> Output
>
> acct1 == acct, but not acct3
>
> Also, since Set is a collection using a vector, C++ requires the type
> of Set element to have a default constructor, a constructor with zero
> parameters like this one in BankAccount.cpp:
>
> // A default constructor is require if you want a collection of these
>
> BankAccount::BankAccount() { name = "???"; balance = -9.99; }

SELF-CHECK

> Use this object declaration to answer the following questions:
>
> Set<int> intSet;

11-1 How many integers can be stored in intSet?

11-2 Write code that prints the number of elements in intSet.

> 11-3 Write a message that attempts to add the integer 89 to the
> collection of integers in intSet.

11-4 Write a message that will remove 89 from intSet.

11.2 class Set<Type>

> Th is section shows how a vector and templates are combined to
> implement a Set class. Th is Set object:

-   is generic because any type of element is allowed with <Type>

-   does not have a fi xed maximum size—it allocates memory as long
    > there is some memory available in the free store

> For several reasons, this new Set type will have the class defi ned in
> one fi le, not the usual two fi les. Th e main reason for this is to
> prevent compile time errors. Some compilers require all code in one fi
> le to get templates to work. Th ere will not be the usual separation
> of class defi nition in a header (.h) fi le from the implementation in
> a separate .cpp fi le.
>
> A second reason for using just one .h fi le is it prevents writing the
> same line before every method heading. Th e code looks cleaner with a
> dozen fewer of these repeated lines: template <class Type>. Also
> there are about a dozen fewer occurrences of Set:: before each method
> defi nition. So the generic (template) Set class will be built in the
> same fi le: Set.h. All methods are in the same fi le:
>
> /\*\*

-   Set.h

-   \* This is a collection class to represent sets of any type.

-   Duplicate elements are not allowed.

> \*/

11.2: class Set<Type>

> \#ifndef SET\_H\_ \#de ne SET\_H\_ \#include <vector>
>
> template<class Type> class Set {
>
> A vector will be used to store the elements in any Set<Type>. Th
> is Set will also maintain an int variable n to store the number of
> unique elements:
>
> private: std::vector<Type> elements; int n;
>
> Th e member data n will be initialized to 0 in the constructor, must
> be increased by 1 for each successful insert, and must be decreased by
> 1 for each successful remove.

11.2.1 THE CONSTRUCTOR Set()

> Th e Set constructor guarantees that a Set starts empty with a
> capacity of 20, which could be larger or smaller.
>
> // The public constructor public:
>
> //--constructor
>
> Set() { elements.resize(20);
>
> n = 0; // This Set object has zero elements when constructed }

Th e programmer may construct Set objects like this:

> Set <double> tests;
>
> Set <string> names;
>
> Set <BankAccount> names;

11.2.2 bool contains(Type const& value) const

> When working with Set objects, it is often important to know if a set
> contains a specifi c element. Th e contains member function uses a
> loop to sequentially search the vector. Once found, contains
> immediately returns true.
>
> // Return true if value is in this set bool contains(Type const&
> value) const { for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) { if (value ==
> elements\[i\]) return true;
>
> }
>
> return false; }
>
> ©
>
> If all n elements are searched for and none were == to element, the
> loop terminates and contains returns false to indicate element is not
> in this set.

11.2.3 void insert(Type const& element)

> Since this collection class is a Set, insert must fi rst ensure the
> collection does not contain the element. If so, a check is made to
> ensure the vector can store more elements. If not, the vector capacity
> is increased before the new element is stored.
>
> // If element is not == to any element, add element to this Set
>
> // The vector will be resized to hold more elements if needed. void
> insert(Type const& element) { if (contains(element)) return;
>
> // Otherwise add the new element at the end of the vector
>
> // First make sure there is enough capacity if (n == elements.size())
> {
>
> // Add memory for 10 more elements whenever needed elements.resize(n +
> 10); }
>
> // Insert after the last meaningful element in this set.
> elements.at(n) = element; n++; }

11.2.4 bool remove(Type const& removalCandidate)

> Th e remove method will remove a found element by overwriting it with
> the last element in the collection. If removalCandidate is not found,
> the method simply returns false.
>
> // pre: The removalCandidate type must overload the == operator //
> post: If found, removalCandidate is removed from this Set.
>
> // // Remove removalCandidate if found and return true.
>
> // If removalCandidate is not in this Set, return false.
>
> bool remove(Type const& removalCandidate) { // Find the index of the
> element to remove int index = 0;
>
> while (index < n && !(removalCandidate == elements\[index\])) {
> index++;
>
> }
>
> // When subscript == size() removalCandidate was not found if (index
> == n) { return false;
>
> } else { // Found it when elements\[subscript\] == removalCandidate.
>
> // Overwrite removalCandidate with the element at the largest index
> elements\[index\] = elements\[n - 1\];
>
> // decrease size by 1, and n--;
>
> // report success to the client code where the message was sent return
> true;
>
> }
>
> }

11.3: The Iterator Pattern

SELF-CHECK

11-5 How many diff erent classes are built when this code is compiled?

> Set<string> ids;
>
> Set<int> studentNumber;
>
> Set<double> points;
>
> Set<double> tests;
>
> 11-6 What is the value of a Set’s size() after each of these
> situations? Assume the Set is constructed before each situation.

a)  10 successful inserts, then 5 successful removals

b)  40 successful inserts

c)  40 successful inserts, then 40 successful removals

11.3 THE ITERATOR PATTERN

> Because each Set object always knows how many elements it stores (n),
> a collection object can be given functions designed to sequentially
> iterate over the entire collection of items. Th is can be made a part
> of any collection class.
>
> Th is textbook’s Set class uses iterator methods to visit the
> contained objects. Th e following program shows how the client code
> could iterate over the entire collection without having to worry about
> going out of bounds. It is a preview of the four methods that will be
> added to class Set<Type> to allow access to all elements.
>
> \#include <iostream> using namespace std;
>
> \#include "Set.h" // For a generic (with templates) Set class
>
> \#include "BankAccount.h"
>
> int main() {
>
> Set<BankAccount> set; // Store set of 3 BankAccount objects
>
> BankAccount anAcct("Devon", 100.00); set.insert(anAcct);
>
> set.insert(BankAccount("Chris", 300.00));
> set.insert(BankAccount("Kim", 200.00));
>
> set. rst(); // Initialize an iteration over all elements double total
> = 0.00; while(set.hasMore()) {
>
> cout << set.current().getName() << " has "; cout <<
> set.current().getBalance() << endl; total +=
> set.current().getBalance(); set.next();
>
> }
>
> cout << "Total balance: " << total << endl;
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> Devon has 100
>
> Chris has 300
>
> Kim has 200
>
> Total balance: 600
>
> Th e initial statement in the loop— rst()—sets the Set object’s
> internal index to refer to the fi rst item in the collection. Th e
> loop test with hasMore() is true as long as there is at least one more
> element to visit. At the end of each loop iteration, the repeated
> statement set.next() updates the internal index either to refer to the
> next item in the collection or to make sure hasMore() will return
> false. Inside the loop, current() returns a reference to the element
> in the collection that is the element that can be accessed.

SELF-CHECK

> 11-7 Write code that determines the maximum BankAccount balance no
> matter how many elements are in the Set<BankAccount>.

11.3.1 THE ITERATOR MEMBER FUNCTIONS

> Th e Set iterator member functions exist for the sole purpose of
> allowing client code to access any and all of the Set elements in a
> sequential fashion, from the fi rst element to the last. Th e rst()
> function must be called to begin the iteration to set the private data
> member current to refer to the fi rst element in the Set object:
>
> void rst() { currentIndex = 0; }
>
> Th e hasMore() member function returns true if there is at least one
> more element to access. You will see this message used as the loop
> test:
>
> while(set.hasMore())
>
> Th e hasMore() member function compares the private data member
> currentIndex to return true when there is at least one more element to
> visit:
>
> bool hasMore() const { return currentIndex < n;
>
> }

Chapter Summary

Th e next() member function simply increments the internal index:

> void next() { currentIndex++; }
>
> And fi nally, current() returns the element referred to by the
> internal cursor current. Notice that the return type is whatever the
> client code specifi ed in constructing the Set<Type>.
>
> Type current() const { return elements\[currentIndex\]; }

CHAPTER SUMMARY

-   Classes with type parameters allow the user to pass a type name as
    > an argument to a class. Th is allows collection classes such as
    > vector, list, and Set to manage any type of object.

-   A class template permits the compiler to create many diff
    > erent classes. Th e compiler does the work. Th e programmer need
    > not implement separate StringVector, IntVector, and
    > BankAccountVector classes, for example.

-   Member functions may be implemented in one fi le with no separate
    > header, while some compilers require it. Th is also reduces a
    > large amount of repeated syntax. Set was built that way as will be
    > the projects. Here is an outline of the Set class in one fi le
    > with comments and the code between curly braces removed. Use this
    > as a model for implementing the Stack and PriorityList
    > programming projects.

> /\*

-   File name: Set.h

-   /

> \#ifndef SET\_H\_ \#de ne SET\_H\_ \#include <vector>
>
> template<class Type> class Set {
>
> private: std::vector<Type> elements; int n; int currentIndex;
>
> public:
>
> Set() { } void insert(Type const& element) { } bool remove(Type const&
> removalCandidate) { } int size() const { }
>
> bool contains(Type const& value) const { }
>
> bool isEmpty() const { } void rst() { } bool hasMore() const { } void
> next() { }
>
> Type current() const { }
>
> };
>
> \#endif /\* SET\_H\_ \*/

-   Th e Set class illustrates how a vector can be utilized as a storage
    > mechanism in a class that provides higher-level messages such as
    > insert and remove—no subscripts required.

-   Collection classes such as Set and vector store collections of
    > objects while providing suitable access to the elements.

-   Th e Set class introduced the notion of iterator member functions
    > that allow client code to traverse the entire collection without
    > revealing the underlying structure. Sets are not ordered or
    > indexed, so iterators are needed to visit the nodes. Other types
    > such as vector are indexed and have the \[\] and at operations.

EXERCISES

1.  Use this code to answer each of the questions below:

> \#include "Set.h" int main() { Set<double> db;
>
> // . . .

a.  How many doubles can db store?

b.  Write code that adds at least four unique elements to db.

c.  Write code that displays all elements in db on separate lines using
    > the iterator methods.

d.  Write code that determines the range of values in db. Range is defi
    > ned as the largest values minus the smallest.

Programming Tips

1.  Code a templated class named plus that shows what happens to two
    > values when + is applied. You may place the class defi nition and
    > method implementation in one fi le named Plus.h. Th e following
    > code should generate the output shown in the comments:

> // You only need one template class
>
> Plus<int> a(2, 3);
>
> Plus<double> b(2.2, 3.3);
>
> Plus<string> c("Abe", "Lincoln");
>
> a.show(); // 5
>
> b.show(); // 5.5
>
> c.show(); // AbeLincoln

1.  Write code that fi nds the range of integers in
    > Set<int> intSet;. Range is defi ned as the largest integer
    > minus the smallest integer.

PROGRAMMING TIPS

1.  Th ere are many standard C++ collection classes (vector, list,
    > stack, queue) that are more versatile and robust than our
    > Set class. You do not need to use the Set class for any real work.
    > Th e Set class was presented here as a review of class defi
    > nitions and vector processing. C++ even has a generic class set.
    > Th e Set class in this chapter introduced how to build generic
    > collections using templates in one fi le.

2.  When implementing generic collections, put all code in one fi le. Th
    > is reduces the amount of repeated code before each
    > member function. Some compilers require one fi le only for
    > template classes.

3.  Iteration is prevalent; sets are not. Th e iterator functions were
    > shown to make you aware that this pattern is frequently used,
    > while showing one way to access all elements of a collection. Th e
    > syntax and method names are diff erent in the C++ Standard
    > Template Library. Sets are not used as often as other collections
    > such as lists, stacks, and maps.

4.  Templates provide genericity. Th e value of templates can be
    > appreciated if you realize that one only needs one template class
    > to create a new class for any C++ type or any new type you create.
    > As you continue your study of C++, you will see other
    > template classes.

5.  Templates provide a lot of extra syntax. Consider the following
    > simple and incomplete collection class that stores elements like a
    > wait line: fi rst in, fi rst out. Th e column on the left shows
    > two fi les and oft-repeated syntax, about 80 words. Th e single .h
    > fi le on the right column is shorter—fewer lines, fewer words, and
    > fewer symbols such as <, >, and ::.

PROGRAMMING PROJECTS

11A class Stack<Type>

> Implement a generic (with templates) Stack. A Stack allows elements to
> be added and removed in a last-in, fi rst-out (LIFO) manner. Stacks
> have an operation called push to place elements at the “top” of the
> stack, and another operation called pop to remove and return the
> element at the top of the stack. Th e only element on the stack that
> may be referenced is the one on the top. Th is means that if two
> elements are pushed onto the stack, the topmost element must be
> “popped”

Programming Projects

> (removed) from the stack before the fi rst-pushed element can be
> referenced. Here is a Stack for storing up to 20 integers. Your
> program must compile and generate the output.
>
> \#include <iostream>
>
> \#include "Stack.h" using namespace std;
>
> int main() { Stack<int> intStack(20); // stack of 20 ints
>
> // Use intStack intStack.push(1); intStack.push(2); intStack.push(3);
> intStack.push(4);
>
> cout << "4? " << intStack.peek() << endl; cout
> << "4? " << intStack.pop() << endl; cout <<
> "3? " << intStack.peek() << endl;
>
> cout << "isEmpty 0? " << intStack.isEmpty() << endl;
> cout << "3 2 1? "; while(! intStack.isEmpty()) { cout <<
> intStack.pop() << " ";
>
> } cout << endl;
>
> cout << "isEmpty 1? " << intStack.isEmpty() << endl;
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> 4? 4
>
> 4? 4 3? 3 isEmpty 0? 0 3 2 1? 3 2 1 isEmpty 1? 1
>
> *Note:* See the beginning of a Queue class in the Programming Tips
> section of this chapter for a complete class in one .h fi le.

11B PriorityList<Type>

> Th is project asks you to implement a collection class
> PriorityList<Type> using a vector data member. Th is new type
> will store a collection of elements as a zero-based indexed list where
> the element at index 0 is considered to have higher priority than the
> element at index 1. Th e element at index size()-1 has the lowest
> priority. An instance of this collection class will be able to store
> just one type of element such as <string>. Remember that the
> element at index 0 is the top priority; the element at index size()-1
> is the lowest priority.
>
> PriorityList<string> todos;
>
> todos.insertElementAt(0, "Study for the CS exam");
> todos.insertElementAt(0, "Get groceries"); todos.insertElementAt(0,
> "Sleep");
>
> for(int priority = 0; priority < todos.size(); priority++) cout
> << todos.getElementAt(priority) << endl;
>
> Output
>
> Sleep
>
> Get groceries
>
> Study for the CS exam
>
> Complete these methods in PriorityList<Type> so it uses a vector
> to store the elements.
>
> // Construct an empty PriorityList with capacity to store 20 elements
>
> PriorityList();
>
> // Return the number of elements currently in this PriorityList int
> size();
>
> // Return true if size() == 0 or false if size() > 0 bool
> isEmpty();
>
> // Insert the element at the given index. If the vector // is too
> small, resize it.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size() void
> insertElementAt(int index, Type el);
>
> // Return a reference to the element at the given index.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size()-1
>
> Type getElementAt(int index);
>
> // Remove the element at the given index.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size()-1 void
> removeElementAt(int index);
>
> // Swap the element located at index with the element at index+1.
>
> // Lower the priority of the element at index size()-1 has no effect.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size() void
> lowerPriorityOf(int index);
>
> // Swap the element located at index with the element at index-1.
>
> // An attempt to raise the priority at index 0 has no effect.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size() void
> raisePriorityOf(int index);
>
> // Move the element at the given index to the end of this list.
>
> // An attempt to move the last element to the last has no effect.

Programming Projects

> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size()-1 void
> moveToLast(int index);
>
> // Move the element at the given index to the front of this list.
>
> // An attempt to move the top element to the top has no effect.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size()-1 void
> moveToTop(int index);
>
> To help you understand how these methods work, consider the program
> below which shows the changing list as each of the messages is sent to
> the list. *Recommended:* implement one method at a time, and write
> tests to ensure that it works.
>
> \#include <iostream>
>
> \#include <string> // Needed by Visual Studio
>
> \#include "PriorityList.h" using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> PriorityList<string> list; list.insertElementAt(0, "a");
> list.insertElementAt(1, "b"); list.insertElementAt(2, "c");
> list.insertElementAt(3, "d");
>
> for (int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++) // a b c d cout <<
> list.getElementAt(i) << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.insertElementAt(1, "f");
>
> for (int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++) // a f b c d cout <<
> list.getElementAt(i) << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.removeElementAt(0);
>
> for (int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++) // f b c d cout <<
> list.getElementAt(i) << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.lowerPriorityOf(3); // no effect list.lowerPriorityOf(0); // move
> f right list.lowerPriorityOf(1); // move f right
> list.lowerPriorityOf(2); // move f right for (int i = 0; i <
> list.size(); i++) // b c d f cout << list.getElementAt(i)
> << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.raisePriorityOf(0); // no effect list.raisePriorityOf(2); // move
> d left list.raisePriorityOf(1); // move d left for (int i = 0; i <
> list.size(); i++) // d b c f cout << list.getElementAt(i)
> << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.moveToLast(list.size() - 1); // no effect
>
> list.moveToLast(0); // move d from top priority to last priority
>
> for (int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++) // b c f d cout <<
> list.getElementAt(i) << " "; cout << endl;
>
> list.moveToTop(0); // no effect
>
> list.moveToTop(2); // move f to top priority again for (int i = 0; i
> < list.size(); i++) // f b c d cout << list.getElementAt(i)
> << " ";
>
> return 0; }

11C PriorityList<Type> THROWS EXCEPTIONS

> *Optional:* Change your code so it throws an exception when the index
> is out of range. To do this, fi rst add this \#include to
> PriorityList<Type>:
>
> \#include <stdexcept>
>
> Th en add an if statement to every method that takes index as a
> parameter. An exception will be thrown if the programmer supplies an
> incorrect index like -1 or an index > size(), which is a good
> thing:
>
> // Insert the element at the given index.
>
> // precondition: index is on the range of 0 through size() void
> insertElementAt(int index, Type element) { if (index < 0 || index
> > size()) { throw std::invalid\_argument(
>
> "\\ninsertElementAt: index must be 0..size()");
>
> } // . . .
