**C H A P T E R T H I R T E E N**

Vector of Vectors (2D Arrays)

SUMMING UP

> You have now experienced the control structures necessary to implement
> any algorithm. You have also experienced ways to build programs with
> free functions and have written standalone classes that will help you
> understand the code in this chapter. Th e vector processing explained
> in the previous two chapters will also help.

COMING UP

> Th is chapter discusses a class that uses two subscripts to manage
> data logically stored in a tablelike format using rows and columns. Th
> is proves useful for storing and managing data in applications such as
> electronic spreadsheets, games, topographical maps, grade books, and
> many other data best viewed as collections of rows and columns. Th is
> chapter also reviews the C++ class construct, as the code examples use
> a class with the topic under study as a data member. After studying
> this chapter, you will be able to

-   process data stored as a vector of vectors (rows and columns)

-   use nested for loops

13.1 vectorofvectors

> Data that conveniently presents itself in a tabular format is
> represented well with a vector of vector object.

**General Form 13.1** *Constructing a* vector *of* vector*s*

> vector <vector<*type*> > *identi er*(*rows*,
> vector<*type*> (*cols*, *initialValueoptional*));
>
> Th e following are example constructions:
>
> vector <vector<double> > table(4, vector<double> (8,
> 0.0)); // 32 zeros vector <vector<string> > name(5,
> vector<string> (100, "TBA")); // 500 TBAs
>
> 377
>
> Reference to individual elements in a vector of vectors requires two
> subscripts, one for the row and another for the column. Because of
> this, another name for this data structure is the *twodimensional (2D)
> array*.

**General Form 13.2** *Accessing individual elements*

> *vectorName* \[*row*\]\[*column*\]
>
> Each subscript must be bracketed individually. It is the programmer’s
> responsibility to keep the subscripts in range. Th e fi rst subscript
> of a doubly subscripted object specifi es the row, and the second
> subscript specifi es the column.
>
> *Nested looping* is commonly used to process the data of 2D arrays. Th
> is code begins with a vector of vectors that has 15 random garbage
> values. Th e nested loops then initialize all elements to the integers
> 1 . . . 15:

*Make sure you have one space here with older versions of C++.*

> vector <vector<int> > nums(3, vector<int> (5));
>
> int count = 1;
>
> for(int row = 0; row < nums.size(); row++) {
>
> // Initialize one row
>
> for(int col = 0; col < nums\[row\].size(); col++) {
> nums\[row\]\[col\] = count; count++; }

SELF-CHECK

13-1 Which type more appropriately manages lists of data—a vector or a
vector of vectors?

> 13-2 Which type more appropriately manages data viewed in a
> row-by-column format—a vector or vector of vectors?
>
> 13-3 Construct a vector of vectors object named sales where 120
> numbers can be stored in 10 rows.
>
> 13-4 Construct a vector of vectors object named sales2 where 120
> numbers are stored in 10 columns.

13.2 class Matrix

> In mathematics, a *matrix* (plural *matrices*) is a rectangular
> vector—of numbers, symbols, or expressions, arranged in rows and
> columns—that is treated in certain prescribed ways. One such way is to
> state the *order* of the matrix. For example, the order of this matrix
> is a 2 x 2 matrix because there are two rows and two columns:

\[12 4 \]

–1 9

> Th e individual items in a matrix are called its *elements* or
> *entries*.
>
> Applications of matrices are found in most scientifi c fi elds
> including every branch of physics. Th ese include classical mechanics,
> optics, electromagnetics, quantum mechanics, quantum electrodynamics,
> and the study of physical phenomena such as the motion of rigid
> bodies. In computer graphics, matrices are used to project a
> three-dimensional image onto a two-dimensional screen. In probability
> theory and statistics, stochastic matrices are used to describe sets
> of probabilities; for instance, they are used within the PageRank
> algorithm that ranks the pages in a Google search.
>
> Matrices can be modeled as a C++ class that maintains the number of
> rows, number of columns, and a vector of vectors to store the
> elements. Here is a header fi le containing the declaration of this
> particular Matrix type (diff erent designs are certainly possible):
>
> // File name: Matrix.h
>
> \#ifndef MATRIX\_H\_
>
> \#de ne MATRIX\_H\_ \#include <vector> class Matrix { private:
>
> int rows, columns;
>
> // Make sure there is a space between > and >
>
> // || std::vector<std::vector<int> > table; public:
>
> // Construct a new Matrix and read data from an input le
> Matrix(std::string leName);
>
> // Construct a new Matrix given a vector of vectors
>
> Matrix(const std::vector<std::vector<int> > & vecOfVecs);
>
> // Return a string representation of this object.
>
> std::string toString();
>
> // Multiply each element by val void scalarMultiply(int val);
>
> // Return the sum of this Matrix + other
>
> Matrix add(Matrix other);
>
> };
>
> \#endif // MATRIX\_H\_
>
> In programs with little data required, interactive input suffi ces.
> Initialization of vector objects quite often involves large amounts of
> data. Th erefore, the data will come from an external fi le. Th is
> will also provide another example of fi le input. Th e fi rst line in
> the fi le of integers named matrix.data specifi es the number of rows
> and columns of the input fi le:
>
> 3 4
>
> 6 7 8 9
>
> 4 5 6 7
>
> 8 7 7 8
>
> Each remaining line represents the quiz scores of one student. We’ll
> be using this intentionally small input fi le while showing examples
> of processing a vector of vectors in class Matrix. Th e ifstream
> object inFile will be associated with this external fi le in the
> constructor, and the number of rows and columns will be extracted from
> the fi rst line in the fi le (3 and 4) with this statement. Th en the
> vector gets resized to row (number of rows) and columns (number of
> columns). Th is is necessary because memory for the vector of vectors
> is being allocated at runtime, dynamically and in the way C++ has
> built these classes: with a Matrix precisely large enough to store
> three rows of data where each row has four integers and the vector of
> vectors gets initialized with the fi le data using a nested for loop
> (a loop inside another loop). Th ese steps are encapsulated in the
> Matrix constructor in the fi le Matrix.cpp:
>
> /\*
>
> \* Matrix.cpp
>
> \*/
>
> \#include <string>
>
> \#include <fstream>
>
> \#include "Matrix.h" using namespace std;
>
> // Constructs a new object and reads data from // the input le speci
> ed as the leName argument.
>
> Matrix::Matrix(string leName) { rows = columns = 0; // Avoid a warning
> from one compiler // Make sure the le named lename is stored in the
> same directory ifstream inFile( leName); inFile >> rows >>
> columns;
>
> // Resize the vector of vectors to any capacity at runtime
> (dynamically).
>
> table.resize(rows, vector<int>(columns));
>
> // Initialize the vector of vectors from le input for (int row = 0;
> row < rows; row++) { for (int col = 0; col < columns; col++) {
> inFile >> table\[row\]\[col\];
>
> }
>
> }
>
> }
>
> As with vector objects, the antibugging technique of displaying all
> initialized elements of a Matrix can help prevent errors. Th is echo
> of the input data is accomplished again with the help of nested loops
> in Matrix::toString.
>
> string Matrix::toString() { string result("");
>
> // Concatenate all elements into one string for (int i = 0; i <
> rows; i++) { for (int j = 0; j < columns; j++) {
>
> result = result + std::to\_string((int) table\[i\]\[j\]) + " ";
>
> }
>
> result = result + "\\n"; // new line"
>
> }
>
> return result; }
>
> Th e following program initializes and displays the data stored in a
> Matrix after using fi le input to initialize the individual Matrix
> elements:
>
> \#include "Matrix.h" \#include <iostream> using namespace std;
>
> int main() {
>
> Matrix m("matrix.data"); cout << m.toString();
>
> return 0; }
>
> Output
>
> 6 7 8 9
>
> 4 5 6 7
>
> 8 7 7 8
>
> Th is Matrix object is now correctly initialized and stores 12
> integers.

13.2.1 SCALAR MULTIPLICATION

> *Scalar multiplication* is the multiplication of a vector by a scalar
> where the product is a vector.
>
> Th is operation is implemented below as a modifi er that changes the
> state of the matrix object:
>
> void Matrix::scalarMultiply(int val) { for (int i = 0; i < rows;
> i++) { for (int j = 0; j < columns; j++) { table\[i\]\[j\] \*= val;
>
> }
>
> }
>
> }

Each element is multiplied by the argument, so this code produces the
output shown:

> m.scalarMultiply(3); cout << m.toString() << endl;
>
> Output
>
> 18 21 24 27
>
> 12 15 18 21
>
> 24 21 21 24

13.2.2 MATRIX ADDITION

> *Matrix addition* occurs when the corresponding entries of two
> matrices are added together:

\[ \] ^+^ \[ \] ^=^ \[ \]

12 4 7 –2 19 2

–1 9 5 –4 4 5

To allow code like this to return a new Matrix,

> Matrix a("a.data");
>
> Matrix b("b.data"); // Uses another input le to initialize Matrix c =
> a.add(b); we need a second constructor that can construct a Matrix
> object given a vector of vectors as the argument. Here is that second
> constructor that accepts a vector of vectors as a const reference
> parameter:
>
> // Construct a new Matrix object given a vector of vectors
>
> Matrix::Matrix(const std::vector<std::vector<int> > &
> vecOfVecs) { rows = vecOfVecs.size(); columns = vecOfVecs\[0\].size();
> table = vecOfVecs; }

Th is will be called to construct a new Matrix object returned by add:

> Matrix Matrix::add(Matrix other) {
>
> vector<vector<int> > temp(rows,
> vector<int>(columns)); for (int i = 0; i < rows; i++) { for
> (int j = 0; j < columns; j++) {
>
> temp\[i\]\[j\] += table\[i\]\[j\] + other.table\[i\]\[j\];
>
> }
>
> }
>
> Matrix result(temp); // Use the second constructor return result; }
>
> Using input fi les representing the three matrices above, this code
> will generate the output shown:
>
> cout << "Matrix a: " << endl << a.toString()
> << endl; cout << "Matrix b: " << endl <<
> b.toString() << endl; cout << "Matrix c: " << endl
> << c.toString() << endl;
>
> Output
>
> Matrix a:
>
> 12 4
>
> -1 9
>
> Matrix b:
>
> 7 -2
>
> 5 -4
>
> Matrix c:
>
> 19 2
>
> 4 5

SELF-CHECK

13-5 In row-by-row processing, which subscript increments more
slowly—row or column?

> 13-6 In column-by-column processing, which subscript increments more
> slowly—row or column?

In the next problems, use this 2 × 2 Matrix:

> 12 4
>
> -1 9
>
> 13-7 Complete method get as a member of Matrix to return the element
> at the given row and column. Matrix.get(1, 0) would return -1.
>
> // Assume get is in class Matrix int Matrix::get(int row, int column)
> {
>
> 13-8 Complete method sum as a member of Matrix to return the sum of
> all elements. Th e sum of the 2 x 2 Matrix is 24.
>
> // Assume sum is in class Matrix int Matrix::sum() {

13.3 PRIMITIVE 2D ARRAYS

> Th e concepts of row-by-row and column-by-column processing also apply
> to primitive C arrays declared with two subscripts. A primitive C
> array declared with two subscripts use int expressions that specify
> the number of rows and columns. For example, x is declared here to
> store 10 rows and fi ve columns of data for a total of 50 numbers:
>
> double x\[10\]\[5\]; // Row subscripts 0...9, column subscripts 0...4
>
> Th e other important diff erence is that the primitive C array has no
> range checking of the subscripts. Th e following table compares the
> Matrix class to the primitive C array declared with two subscripts:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       **vector of vectors**                                                   **Primitive C Array**
  -------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  > **General Form**   vector <vector<*type*> >                                    *type* *identi er* \[*rows*\]\[*columns*\];
                                                                                               
                       *identi er* (*rows*, vector<*type*>(*columns*));                  

  > **Example**        vector <vector<int> > unitsSold(4, vector<int>(6));   int unitsSold \[4\]\[6\];

  > **Range Check**    Yes                                                                     No

  > **Resizable**      Yes                                                                     No

  > **\#include**      \#include<vector>                                                 Not needed
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Th e vector of vectors, unitsSold, manages four rows and six columns
> of integers (24 elements all together). Th e primitive C array of the
> same name (declared in the right column above) manages the same number
> of integers with the same subscript range. Diff erences include the
> fact that primitive arrays do not range check subscripts. Individual
> array elements are referenced in the same manner whether you are using
> a primitive C array or a vector of vectors. Subscripts always start at
> 0 in both data structures. Th is means that the following code may be
> used with either a vector of vectors or a primitive doubly subscripted
> C array:
>
> int unitsSold\[4\]\[6\]; // vector<vector<int> >
> unitsSold(4, vector<int>(6));
>
> for (int r = 0; r < 4; r++) { for (int c = 0; c < 6; c++)
> unitsSold\[r\]\[c\] = r + c; }
>
> for (int r = 0; r < 4; r++) { for (int c = 0; c < 6; c++) { cout
> << unitsSold\[r\]\[c\] << " ";
>
> } cout << endl;
>
> }

13.4: Arrays with More than Two Subscripts

> Output with either a vector of vectors or primitive C array

1.  1 2 3 4 5

2.  2 3 4 5 6

3.  3 4 5 6 7

4.  4 5 6 7 8

SELF-CHECK

> Use this declaration to answer the questions that follow:
>
> int a\[3\]\[4\];

13-9 What is the value of a\[0\]\[0\]?

> 13-10 Does a get its subscripts checked?
>
> 13-11 How many int elements are properly managed by a?
>
> 13-12 What is the row (fi rst) subscript range for a?
>
> 13-13 What is the column (second) subscript range for a?
>
> 13-14 Write code to initialize all elements of a to 999.
>
> 13-15 Write code to display all elements in each row of a on separate
> lines with eight spaces for each element.

13.4 ARRAYS WITH MORE THAN TWO SUBSCRIPTS

> Singly and doubly subscripted vectors occur more frequently than
> vectors with more than two subscripts. However, vectors with three or
> even more subscripts are sometimes useful. Triply subscripted arrays
> are possible because C++ does not limit the number of subscripts. For
> example, the declaration double q\[3\]\[11\]\[6\]
>
> could represent the quiz grades for three courses, since 198 (3 × 11 ×
> 6) grades can be stored under the same name (q). Th is triply
> subscripted object q\[1\]\[9\]\[3\]
>
> is a reference to quiz index 3 of student index 9 in course index 1.
> In the following program, an array with three subscripts is
> initialized (with meaningless data). Th e fi rst
> subscript—representing a course—changes the most slowly. So the vector
> object q is initialized and then displayed in a course-by-course
> manner:
>
> // Declare, initialize, and display a triply subscripted vector
>
> // object. The primitive C subscripted object is used here, but we
>
> // could also use a vector of Matrix objects to do the same thing.
>
> \#include <iostream> using namespace std;
>
> int main() { const int courses = 3; const int students = 11; const int
> quizzes = 6; int q\[courses\]\[students\]\[quizzes\];
>
> for (int c = 0; c < courses; c++) { for (int row = 0; row <
> students; row++) { for (int col = 0; col < quizzes; col++) {
>
> // Give each quiz a value using a meaningless formula
> q\[c\]\[col\]\[row\] = (col + 1) \* (row + 2) + c + 25;
>
> }
>
> }
>
> }
>
> for (int course = 0; course < courses; course++) { cout <<
> endl;
>
> cout << "Course \#" << course << endl; for (int row
> = 0; row < students; row++) { cout.width(3); cout << row
> << ": ";
>
> for (int col = 0; col < quizzes; col++) { cout.width(4);
>
> cout << q\[course\]\[col\]\[row\];
>
> } cout << endl;
>
> }
>
> } return 0; }
>
> Output with updated student line
>
> Course \#0
>
> 0: 27 33 41 49 57 65
>
> 1: 28 34 43 52 61 70
>
> 2: 29 35 45 55 65 75
>
> 3: 30 36 47 58 69 80
>
> 4: 31 37 49 61 73 85
>
> 5: 32 39 46 53 60 67
>
> 6: 33 41 49 57 65 73
>
> 7: 34 43 52 61 70 79
>
> 8: 35 45 55 65 75 85
>
> 9: 36 47 58 69 80 91
>
> 10: 37 49 61 73 85 97

Exercises

> Course \#1
>
> 0: 28 34 42 50 58 66
>
> 1: 29 35 44 53 62 71
>
> 2: 30 36 46 56 66 76
>
> 3: 31 37 48 59 70 81
>
> 4: 32 38 50 62 74 86
>
> 5: 33 40 47 54 61 68
>
> 6: 34 42 50 58 66 74
>
> 7: 35 44 53 62 71 80
>
> 8: 36 46 56 66 76 86
>
> 9: 37 48 59 70 81 92
>
> 10: 38 50 62 74 86 98
>
> Course \#2
>
> 0: 29 35 43 51 59 67
>
> 1: 30 36 45 54 63 72
>
> 2: 31 37 47 57 67 77
>
> 3: 32 38 49 60 71 82
>
> 4: 33 39 51 63 75 87
>
> 5: 34 41 48 55 62 69
>
> 6: 35 43 51 59 67 75
>
> 7: 36 45 54 63 72 81
>
> 8: 37 47 57 67 77 87
>
> 9: 38 49 60 71 82 93
>
> 10: 39 51 63 75 87 99

CHAPTER SUMMARY

-   A doubly subscripted vector of vectors and a primitive C++ 2D array
    > both manage data that is logically organized in a tabular
    > format—in rows and columns.

-   Th e fi rst subscript specifi es the rows of data in a table; the
    > second represents the columns.

-   Th e elements stored in these data structures can be processed row
    > by row or column by col-umn.

-   Nested for loops are commonly used to process these data structures.

-   Primitive 2D arrays do not check the subscript, which can lead to
    > diffi cult errors. vector can check with at messages, as in
    > nums.at(5).at(20); to reference the 21st element in the 6th row.

EXERCISES

1.  For each doubly subscripted object declaration below, determine:

    a.  Th e total number of elements

    b.  Th e value of all elements

> vector<vector<string> > teacher(5, vector<string>(7,
> "to hire")); vector<vector<double> > quiz(10,
> vector<double>(32, 0.0)); vector<vector<int> >
> nums(10, vector<int>(10, -999)); double budget\[6\]\[100\];

1.  Detect the error(s) in the following attempts to declare a doubly
    > subscripted vector:

    a.  int x(5,6);

    b.  double x\[5,6\];

    c.  vector<vector<int> > x(5, 6);

2.  Declare a doubly subscripted object identifi ed with three rows and
    > four columns of fl oatingpoint numbers.

3.  Write C++ code to accomplish the following tasks:

    a.  Declare a doubly subscripted object called aTable that stores 10
        > rows and 14 columns of fl oating-point numbers.

    b.  Set every element in aTable to 0.0.

    c.  Write a for loop that sets all elements in row 4 to -1.0.

4.  Show the output from the following program when the dialogue is:

  a.   \# rows? ***2***   d.   \# rows? ***1***
  ---- ------------------ ---- ------------------
       \# cols? ***3***        \# cols? ***1***
  b.   \# rows? ***3***   e.   \# rows? ***1***
       \# cols? ***2***        \# cols? ***2***
  c.   \# rows? ***4***   f.   \# rows? ***2***
       \# cols? ***4***        \# cols? ***1***

> \#include <iostream>
>
> \#include <vector> using namespace std;
>
> int main() { int maxRow, maxCol; cout << "\# rows? "; cin
> >> maxRow; cout << "\# cols? "; cin >> maxCol;
>
> vector<vector<int> > aTable(maxRow,
> vector<int>(maxCol, -999));
>
> // Initialize Matrix elements

Exercises

> for (int row = 0; row < maxRow; row++) { for (int col = 0; col <
> maxCol; col++) { aTable\[row\]\[col\] = row \* col;
>
> }
>
> }
>
> // Display table elements for (int row = 0; row < maxRow; row++) {
> for (int col = 0; col < maxCol; col++) { cout.width(5); cout
> << aTable\[row\]\[col\];
>
> }
>
> cout << endl;
>
> } return 0; }
>
> Use this class to answer questions 6 through 9:
>
> class huh { public:
>
> huh(int initLastRow, int initLastColumn); void add(int increment);
> void show() const; int rowSum(int currentRow) const; private:
>
> int lastRow, lastCol;
>
> std::vector <std:vector<int> > m; };
>
> huh::huh(int initLastRow, int initLastColumn) { lastRow = initLastRow;
> lastCol = initLastColumn; // The vector of vectors must be initialized
> in the constructor.
>
> // Use a resize message with two arguments to avoid a loop for each
> row.
>
> m.resize(lastRow, vector<int>(lastCol));
>
> for(int row = 0; row < lastRow; row++) { for(int col = 0; col <
> lastCol; col++) { // Give each item a meaningless formula
> m\[row\]\[col\] = (row + 1) + (col + 1);
>
> }
>
> }
>
> }
>
> void huh::show() const { int row, col;
>
> for(row = 0; row < lastRow; row++) { for(col = 0; col < lastCol;
> col++) { cout.width(4); cout << m\[row\]\[col\];
>
> }
>
> cout << endl;
>
> }
>
> }

6.  Write the output generated by the following program:

> int main() { huh h(1, 2);
>
> h.show(); return 0; }

6.  Write the output generated by the following program:

> int main() { huh h(3, 7);
>
> h.show(); return 0; }

6.  Complete the member function huh::rowSum that returns the sum of all
    > the elements in a given row. Th e program below must generate the
    > output of 22.

> int main() { huh h(4, 4); cout << h.rowSum(2); return 0; }

6.  Complete the member function huh::showDiagonal that prints all
    > elements on the diagonal. Assume rows and columns are the same. Th
    > e program to the left must generate the output on the right.
    > *Hint:* You may use cout.width to get the required indentation.

> Output

  -----------------------------------
  int main() { huh h(4, 4);     > 2
                                >
  h.showDiagonal(); return 0;   > 4
                                >
  }                             > 6
                                
                                8
  ----------------------------- -----
  -----------------------------------

> 10\. To class Matrix, add member function transpose that changes the
> Matrix to its transpose. Th e transpose of a Matrix has the rows replace
> the columns and the columns replace the rows. You will need to declare a
> temporary vector of vectors.
>
> Here is what the matrix should look like before:

1.  4

2.  5

3.  6

> Here is what the matrix should look like after:
>
> 1 2 3

1.  5 6

PROGRAMMING TIPS

1.  When constructing vectors of vectors, be careful not to
    > write >> in your constructions with some compilers.

> vector<vector<int>> error(10, vector<int> (10, -1));
> // Error: Need space between > and >

1.  When using vectors of vectors, consider using the range-checking
    > member function vector::at, especially when fi rst using
    > two subscripts. Th e standard vector class does not automatically
    > check the subscripts, but it can be made to do so with the
    > vector::at member function.

> vector<vector<int> > aTable(3, vector<int> (3, -1));
> aTable.at(2).at(3) = 23; // Column 3 out of bounds aTable.at(3).at(2)
> = 32; // Row 3 out of bounds cout << aTable.at(0).at(0); //
> Output: -1
>
> It is common to get a subscript variable that is out of bounds. Th e
> sooner you know about it, the better. With range checking on, you’ll
> know immediately.

1.  Many of the programming tips for vectors with one subscript can be
    > applied to doubly and triply subscripted objects:

    -   Th e elements of any vector must be of the same class. For
        > example, a Matrix cannot store both string and integer values.

    -   Any object that uses a large amount of memory may be passed as a
        > const reference parameter. As with singly subscripted vectors,
        > memory is saved and only one value (the address of the Matrix)
        > needs to be copied. However, when a Matrix is passed as a
        > value parameter, every single element gets copied, making the
        > program less effi cient. void function(const
        > Matrix<double> & m) // Pass by const reference is more
        > effi cient than

> void function(Matrix<double> m)

-   Range checking should be employed while you are learning to
    > manipulate doubly subscript-ed objects.

**PROGRAMMING PROJECTS**

13A MAGIC SQUARE

> A magic square is an *n*-by-*n* vector of vectors where the integers 1
> to *n*^2^ appear exactly once where *n* must be a positive integer
> like 1, 3, or 5. Additionally, the sum of the integers in every row,
> every column, and on both diagonals is the same. Implement class
> MagicSquare with two member functions: a constructor and display. Th e
> following code should generate the output shown:

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > MagicSquare magic(1); magic.display(); 1 by 1 magic square   MagicSquare magic(3); magic.display(); 3 by 3 magic square   MagicSquare magic(5); magic.display(); 5 by 5 magic square
  >                                                                                                                           
  > 1                                                            8 1 6                                                        17 24 1 8 15
                                                                                                                              
                                                                 3.  5 7                                                      23 5 7 14 16
                                                                                                                              
                                                                 4.  9 2                                                      4 6 13 20 22
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              10. 12 19 21 3
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              11. 18 25 2 9
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              
  -------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> You should be able to construct an *n*-by-*n* magic square for any odd
> value *n* from 1 to 15. When *j* is 1, place the value of *j* in the
> middle of the fi rst row. Th en, for a counter value ranging from 1 to
> *n*^2^, move up one row and to the right one column, and store the
> counter value—unless one of the following events occurs:

1.  When the next row becomes 0, make the next row equal to *n* – 1.

2.  When the next column becomes *n*, make the next column equal to 0.

3.  If a position is already fi lled or the upper-right corner element
    > has just obtained a value, place the next counter value in the
    > position that is one row below the position where the last counter
    > value has been placed.

> You will need to resize the vector of vectors instance variable which
> can be done like this:
>
> // An instance variable vector<vector<int> > magic;
>
> // Resize the vector to be a size by size vector magic =
> vector<vector<int> >(size, vector<int>(size));

13B GAME OF LIFE

> Th e Game of Life was invented by John Conway to simulate the birth
> and death of cells in a society. Th e following rules govern the birth
> and/or death of cells between two consecutive time periods. At time
> *T*:

-   A cell is born if there was none at time *T* – 1 and exactly three
    > of its neighbors were alive.

-   An existing cell remains alive if at time *T* – 1 there were either
    > two or three neighbors.

-   A cell dies from isolation if at time *T* – 1 there were fewer than
    > two neighbors.

-   A cell dies from overcrowding if at time *T* – 1 there were more
    > than three neighbors.

> A neighborhood consists of the eight elements around any element (N
> represents one neighbor):
>
> NNN
>
> N N
>
> NNN
>
> Th e neighborhood can extend to the other side of the society. For
> example, a location in the fi rst row has a neighborhood that includes
> three locations in the last row. Th e following patterns would occur
> when T ranges from 1 to 5, with the initial society shown at T=1. O
> represents a live cell; a blank indicates that no cell exists at that
> particular location in the society.
>
> T=0 T=1 T=2 T=3 T=4 ....... ....... ....... ....... .......
>
> ..O.O.. ..O.O.. ....... ....... .......
>
> ..OOO.. ..O.O.. ..O.O.. ...O... .......
>
> ....... ...O... ...O... ...O... .......
>
> ....... ....... ....... ....... .......
>
> Other societies may stabilize like this:
>
> T=0 T=1 T=2 T=3 T=4 ....... ....... ....... ....... .......
>
> ....... ...O... ....... .. O... .......
>
> ..OOO.. ...O... ..OOO.. ...O... ..OOO..
>
> ....... ...O... ....... ...O... .......
>
> ....... ....... ....... ....... .......
>
> Use a test driver like this to see the fi rst fi ve versions of a
> society. Design your own fi le to be read by the GameOfLife
> constructor.
>
> \#include "GameOfLife.h" // For the GameOfLife class
>
> int main() {
>
> GameOfLife society("5by7");
>
> for (int updates = 1; updates <= 5; updates++) {
> society.toString(); society.update();
>
> } return 0; }
>
> Implement the following member functions defi ned in this header fi
> le:
>
> /\*

-   File name: GameOfLife.h

-   \* A model for John Conway's Game of Life to simulate the birth and
    > death \* of cells. This is an example of cellular automata.

> \*/

\#ifndef GAMEOFLIFE\_H\_ \#de ne GAMEOFLIFE\_H\_

\#include <vector> \#include <string> class GameOfLife {

private: std::vector<std::vector<bool> > theSociety; int
nRows; int nCols;

public: /\*

-   Write the constructor to initialize a vector of vectors so

-   all elements are false. Also set nRows and nCols

\*

\*/

GameOfLife(int rows, int cols);

/\* \* Return the number of rows, which is indexed from
0..numberOfRows()-1.

\*/ int numberOfRows();

/\* \* The number of columns, which is indexed from
0..numberOfColumns()-1.

\*/

int numberOfColumns();

/\* \* Place a new cell in the society.

-   Precondition: row and col are in range.

-   \* row The row to grow the cell.

-   col The column to grow the cell.

\*/

void growCellAt(int row, int col);

/\* \* Return true if there is a cell at the given row and column.

-   Return false if there is none at the speci ed location.

-   \* row The row to check.

-   col The column to check.

\*/

bool cellAt(int row, int col);

/\*

-   Return one big string of cells to represent the current state of the

-   society of cells (see output below where '.' represents an empty
    > space \* and 'O' is a live cell. There is no need to
    > test toString. Simply use \* it to visually inspect. Here is one
    > sample output from toString:

> \*

-   GameOfLife society(4, 14);

-   society.growCellAt(1, 2);

-   society.growCellAt(2, 3);

-   society.growCellAt(3, 4);

-   cout << society.toString();

> \*

-   Output \* ..............

-   ..O...........

-   ...O..........

-   ....O.........

-   \*/

> std::string toString();
>
> /\*

-   Count the neighbors around the given location. Use wraparound. A
    > cell

-   in row 0 has neighbors in the last row if a cell is in the same
    > column

-   or the column to the left or right. In this example, cell 0,5 has
    > two

-   neighbors in the last row, cell 2,8 has four neighbors, cell 2,0
    > has \* four neighbors, cell 1,0 has three neighbors. Cell 3,8 has
    > 3 neighbors.

-   The potential location for a cell at 4,8 would have 3 neighbors.

> \*

-   .....O..O \* O........

-   O.......O

-   O.......O \* ....O.O..

-   \* The return values should always be in the range of 0 through 8.

> \*/
>
> int neighborCount(int row, int col);
>
> /\* \* Update the state to represent the next society.

-   Typically, some cells will die off while others are born.

> \*/ void update(); };
>
> \#endif /\* GAMEOFLIFE\_H\_ \*/
>
> Th is GameOfLife has wraparound. It is recommended that you use nested
> for loops to visit all eight neighbors. Use an additional two int
> variables to be the actual row and column that are set, while checking
> to see if a loop index is negative or too large. Try to imagine the
> cells covering a torus:
>
> Th e O below has eight neighbors labeled a through h. Wraparound is
> needed for neighbors labeled d through h. Th e labels are repeated to
> show where they need to be checked.

f g h

> e d
>
> *Another hint:* During update, initialize all elements of a temporary
> vector of vectors to false. Look at the vector instance variable. Only
> grow cells in the temporary vector. When done, assign this to the
> instance variable like this:
>
> theSociety = temporary;
>
> Here are two examples of updates in two diff erent cell societies.
> After 21 updates, the society on the right will return to its original
> form shifted fi ve spaces to the right. If you do 63 updates, you will
> see the form that begins on the right shifted to be on the left due to
> wraparound.

\#include <iostream>\#include <iostream> using namespace
std;using namespace std; \#include "GameOfLife.h"\#include
"GameOfLife.h"

int main() {int main() {

GameOfLife game(3, 8); GameOfLife society(5, 30);

game.growCellAt(1, 2); society.growCellAt(1, 6); game.growCellAt(1, 3);
society.growCellAt(2, 7); game.growCellAt(1, 4); society.growCellAt(2,
8); cout << game.toString(); society.growCellAt(3, 7);

> society.growCellAt(3, 6);

for (int t = 1; t <= 5; t++) {

game.update(); society.growCellAt(1, 16); cout << game.toString();
society.growCellAt(2, 17);

} society.growCellAt(2, 18); return 0; society.growCellAt(3, 17); }
society.growCellAt(3, 16); *Output:*

> .......OO........OO...........
>
> ..............................
>
> ..............................
>
> .......O.........O............
>
> ........OO........OO..........
>
> .......OO........OO...........
>
> ..............................
>
> ..............................
>
> ........O.........O...........
>
> .........O.........O..........
>
> .......OOO.......OOO..........
>
> ........O.........O...........
>
> ..............................
>
> ..............................
>
> .......O.O.......O.O..........
>
> ........OO........OO..........
>
> *Note:* Th e sixth update shows wraparound.

© 2018 Franklin, Beedle & Associates All rights reserved
